Case 1:

Host: Hi Lucy, nice to meet you. So I understand that you were referred here by your GP because you've been feeling quite down recently?

Client: Yeah, I thought I should. I've been feeling quite bad for quite a while, so I thought maybe it's time to see someone about it because I don't want to feel like this anymore.

Host: Okay, so from your notes, I saw that you saw the GP about three months ago?

Client: Yeah.

Host: And how long have you been feeling down altogether?

Client: Quite a few months before that as well actually, but it's gotten pretty bad these past few months, so that's kind of why I came.

Host: Okay, so has it gotten worse since you saw your GP?

Client: Yeah.

Host: Okay, so tell me, how are things at the moment?

Client: Well, it kind of started just feeling a bit low and wound up about things, but I don't know, just recently I just can't really be bothered to do anything at all. I kind of find it hard to get motivated for things, and I want to be, I really want to be better, but it's just kind of reaching the point now where I just, I want to do something about it.

Host: Okay, so you said that you're feeling really down, really sad?

Client: Yeah.

Host: And you feel like you haven't got any motivation?

Client: Um, yeah.

Host: Okay, and you feel like you haven't got any motivation, but it sounds like you've put quite a lot of pressure on yourself to try and feel a bit better?

Client: Yeah, I just, it's kind of hard as well because there's not really anyone to talk to about it. I just kind of stay on my own, try to, I don't like to think about it, but...

Host: Okay, so you say you've been feeling quite isolated, there's not many people around?

Client: Yeah, no one I can talk to about it. They don't listen or understand anyway.

Host: Okay, so I'm just going to try and find out a little bit more about you. So I understand that you're an English student at uni?

Client: Yeah.

Host: And you live away from home with some friends, is that right?

Client: Yeah.

Host: Okay, so you live with your friends, but you say you feel like you can't talk to them?

Client: Yeah, I mean they're lovely, I get on really well with them, but I don't know, just recently whenever they want to go out or stuff, I just, I don't want to bring them down. They don't understand what I'm going through. They kind of, they didn't make fun of how I feel, but they don't really understand what it's like. I don't want to go out with them and bring them down.

Host: Okay, so it sounds like you try and hide the way you're feeling from them?

Client: I guess, I mean it's easier to hide it than to try to explain it all the time when no one really wants to know.

Host: Okay, so it sounds like you've been feeling down, you've been feeling unmotivated, and you feel like you want to be better, but actually it sounds like you feel like you can't reach out for help, you can't speak to anybody?

Client: No, I don't really talk to my parents about it either.

Host: How's that? Are they kind of hard to talk to?

Client: Yeah, they just don't really understand.

Host: Okay, I'm just going to go back in time a bit. When did all of this start? You said it's been going on for quite a few months?

Client: Yeah, I guess it kind of started when I was revising for my exams. I guess the stress, I put a lot of stress on myself. I think I've always wanted to do well for me and I guess my parents. So the stress of exams and it was also kind of hard because my parents were going through a little bit of a troubled time.

Host: Okay, so this would be like last March, last April?

Client: Yeah, around that time.

Host: So about six months ago, and it sounds like a lot was happening. So you had a lot of uni pressure, and you said that your parents were having marital problems?

Client: Yeah.

Host: Okay, and it sounds like that was a real shock to you?

Client: Yeah, I guess it was hard as well because I wasn't doing well at uni. I guess I just felt a bit guilty. I know it sounds silly, but I felt like maybe if I could do better, then they would get better. But I didn't, it just wasn't really happening.

Host: Okay, so it sounds like you were trying to work hard and be more successful because you thought that that would make them happier and try and fix things?

Client: Yeah, I wanted to make them feel better, but it just kind of backfired a little, I guess.

Host: How did it backfire?

Client: Well, it just ended...

Host: So you feel like you can't really reach out to your parents right now, you can't really confide in your friends. And so I suppose I'm just wondering if you can tell me a bit more about how you've been feeling, I mean, say this past week?

Client: Really not good, to be honest. I actually, if I don't have to though, I don't really leave the house or get out of bed. I just, I can't find the motivation for the things I used to enjoy. I used to love doing sports or going out, and now I just prefer to lie in bed and not really do anything.

Host: Okay.

Client: I missed a few lectures this week that I should have gone to.

Host: Right. So I suppose I'm just wondering then, if we can think about one thing, say a lecture, what kind of thoughts do you have about going to a lecture before it happens?

Client: I don't really see the point anymore. If I can't do as well as I should be doing, then what's the point in putting myself in those positions? I just, I can't be bothered anymore to try. It just stresses me out more than I need to be.

Host: Okay, so it sounds like the kind of thoughts you've got in your head are it's pointless and it's not worth it?

Client: Yeah.

Host: Do you have any other thoughts in your head when you're just at that point before you go to the lecture?

Client: Like, I don't know, I don't really even deserve to be here if I can't do well enough. I see all these other students doing well and doing better and wanting to be there. I don't know why I'm here even.

Host: So it sounds like you feel like you're not as good as other people here?

Client: Yeah.

Host: Okay, I'm just, sorry, okay if I take this as we go through, it's just I'm trying to, I guess, understand what you're telling me, and it helps me just to write it down, and I'll share this with you later.

Client: Okay.

Host: So it sounds like those are some quite negative thoughts to have. You're kind of saying, you know, it feels like it's pointless, it's more effort than it's worth, and I don't deserve to be here. I mean, when you have those thoughts, how do you feel?

Client: Very unworthy, probably would be the best way to put it. Kind of, I don't know, lower than normal because then it makes me think about all the things I should...

Host: So what you described there, then, you said "I'm unworthy, I should be doing lots of things better," and those are kind of what I would call thoughts. Actually, I suppose I'm trying to understand what it feels like in your gut. What kind of emotions do you feel? Happier? Do you feel sad? What kind of emotions are you feeling when you have those thoughts?

Client: Sad, definitely sad. A bit of kind of anger and frustration as well.

Host: I noticed when you're kind of telling me this, and I know this is quite a heavy topic, but you're kind of laughing. I suppose I wonder a little bit, how do you feel about having these emotions, talking about these emotions?

Client: Embarrassed. But it's, I've never really talked about it, it's quite uncomfortable to be in this situation.

Host: Okay, well, you're doing a great job. I know that this can be difficult. Okay, so it sounds like some of the thoughts you're describing are it's pointless, it's more effort than it's worth, I don't deserve to be here, I'm unworthy. And those kinds of thoughts, it sounds like they just flip through your mind, and then you describe different emotions that those lead to, like feeling sad, anger, frustration, embarrassment. What about in your body? What happens? How do you feel kind of physically?

Client: I used to be, I think, from those emotions, very wound up, very kind of stressed all the time. But recently, it's just a lot more draining than anything. Just quite lethargic and I can't be bothered anymore, and my body reflects that. But then when I try and sleep, I just can't seem to have a satisfying night's sleep. It's really, really frustrating.

Host: So it sounds like this is affecting you as it's draining you of your energy, like your body can't be bothered. I think that's a really good way of describing it. And you're noticing sleep problems as well. And then what do you do? So we're back to the point before the lecture, so you start having these thoughts, these emotions, and your body, I guess it sounds like those thoughts are quite draining, so draining your energy. What then happens? What do you do next?

Client: I kind of focus on the negative thoughts when I probably should not think about them, but I focus on them, and then I don't really want to do anything. I stay in bed or...

Host: So you think even more about this kind of worrying, so you do a bit of dwelling, and you stay in bed, and it sounds like you don't, you know, you haven't tried speaking to your friends about it or family?

Client: No.

Host: Okay, and then after you've done that, so after you've not gone to the lecture, you've stayed in bed, you kind of spent time, as you said, focusing on those thoughts, those negative thoughts, how do you feel after that? Do you feel better or do you feel worse?

Client: I guess I feel slightly worse but then a bit numb in a way, kind of once you've felt that because I do feel tired all the time. I just try and push it out and then you don't really think about anything, and it's almost nicer that way than to keep focusing on how much you're getting wrong and how much you can't do stuff. Sometimes it's better just to not think about it at all.

Host: So it sounds like in some ways it's a bit of a relief to do that?

Client: Yeah.

Host: But in other ways, maybe you think it might make things worse?

Client: Probably in the long run, yeah.


Case 2 :

host£ºwatch this full series at the links in the description below and subscribe to our youtube channel to watch new mental health videos every week in our med circle series on cognitive behavioral therapy. Dr. Judy and I sat down to discuss the ins and outs of how that therapy works and how it can be used to change your thoughts, your emotions, and ultimately your behaviors. And then we decided that we would do a mock therapy session with myself portraying somebody who has a cognitive belief or what is it, yeah, a certain kind of core belief, core belief, core belief, yes, and you're going to walk me through that belief and show the viewers how CBT can actually bring them closer to the truth and closer to a more healthy way to think and react and behave when it comes to our emotions and thoughts.

Client£ºSo my core belief in this mock therapy session is going to be that I feel like I'm unlovable right by everybody, right, that's my core belief. I feel like I'm pretty lovable by most people, yeah, I'm sure not everybody.

host£ºKyle's actual core belief, right, exactly, you are playing a patient in which has that core belief and I think it's a common core belief for people whether they want to admit it or not.

Client£ºThat's right.

host£ºAnd it makes sense because it's one of our basic drives is to be loved by people, I mean that's just a basic human drive and it's not just about emotional wellness that you feel loved, it's actually about physical survival. If you're not loved and nurtured then you might die, right, you know, your physical being will actually perish, right, if you're not nurtured well, if you're not taken care of well and so I think this is a good one for us to role play.

Client£ºCool, well this will be great for the viewers to see what a therapy session could be like and also how CBT is used so I'll let you take it away.

host£ºOkay great, so Kyle what brings you in today?

Client£ºI recently broke up with a long-term partner and it's been one of many breakups I've had in my life and at this point I'm getting older, I have gray hair, I feel like the clock is ticking and I don't feel like I will ever find somebody who loves me. I don't feel like, I feel like I would have found them already. I feel like I've dated enough people to make that happen and it's not happening and I don't see anything changing and my depression is through the roof because of it.

host£ºOkay so I'm sorry about your breakup and I'm sorry that kind of led to a cascade of thoughts in your head about what this really means about your future for relationships and about you ultimately so we're going to do a practice technique right now and this technique is called laddering and what this is going to help us with is getting some of those negative automatic thoughts. I mean you said many right now actually just in your description we're going to work with one of those and it helps us to get them organized in a way so that you can actually see what that automatic thought leads to. Sort of like if you think about automatic thoughts being kind of like an iceberg and the automatic thoughts is the tip of the iceberg that you can see above the water, it's conscious but you have to kind of attune your awareness to it but deeper thoughts are actually submerged, you can't see them, they're below the water level and that's what we need to get to because that's the crux of the issue. These core beliefs drive how you feel, how you think, and even the rules that you have in life about how you should behave in order to have safety in many ways. And so let's start with an automatic thought. I heard you say that you were thinking based on this breakup and other ones that I might never find somebody who will love me.

Client£ºYeah.

host£ºSo let's work with that automatic thought. There were other ones but I think this one is a good one to work with. So if your automatic thought is I'm not going to find somebody who loves me, what might that mean? What does that thought mean to you?

Client£ºWell, I look around at my friends and my family who are in relationships, who are having kids, who are posting pictures, who are sending out Christmas cards with their significant others and I don't feel like I will have that. I feel like while everyone else will have love in their life and meaning and purpose, I will have nothing. I will be alone and I am alone and I am also lonely.

host£ºRight and that is devastating. So what might it mean if you were alone? Like let's take that part of it. So you know you kind of broke it down like well I don't think that I'm going to find anybody to love me or who I love or who will have this relationship with and to me that means that I'll be alone. So what would it mean if you were alone? Like what if that did happen?

Client£ºthat mean about you?

host£º?well on one hand it means that nobody i on one hand it means that people wouldn't i'm alone it means that people don't want to be with me which is right awful it's an awful thought um and it also means that i won't be able to enjoy life how i could i will miss out on dinners and holidays and weekend trips and children and legacy and memories there are there's a laundry list of consequences from being alone.

Client£ºright and you had just said that one of the things that being alone means would be that maybe that means nobody wants to be with you and so what would that thought mean if it was true what if nobody wanted to be with you what if that was an actual fact like what would that mean?

host£ºthat there's something wrong with me and if there is something wrong with you if that thought was true then what would that mean?

Client£ºthat i haven't done a good job in my life could be becoming i haven't done a good job becoming somebody that people want to be around.

host£ºright that people want to be in a relationship with right and what would that mean about you if people didn't want to be in a relationship with you that you haven't done a good job and people didn't want to be around you?

Client£ºthat i'm hope that i'm worthless and i'm a waste of time.

host£ºyeah well that's the core belief the core belief is i'm worthless or sometimes people will say i'm unlovable sometimes they're interchangeable but like that's how we got to the core belief is we keep doing this laddering technique where any negative thought you have i ask you what does that mean if that thought was true what would that mean about you okay well if that thought was true that would mean that i would be alone okay well what would that mean if that was true if you were alone well that would mean that nobody would want to be around me you know and you kind of kept breaking it down to like the deeper and deeper level until you got to this idea of that would mean that i was worthless that maybe i'm just not capable of being loved that i'm undeserving of love and that's what we mean by a core belief which is like a horrible thing to have to think about and i want to be clear that core beliefs are not necessarily what you actually believe about yourself but core beliefs are your biggest fear meaning that if it was true it would be devastating if you truly were worthless or if you truly were unlovable that would be devastating.

Client£ºi don't feel if you would have asked me three minutes ago or four minutes ago do you do you think you're do you think you're a worthless person i would have said no not at all right.

host£ºyeah and i think that when people first encounter what could be their core belief they they have that kind of reaction of but i don't really believe it's true at least not intellectually but it's really about the fear of man but what if it was true like what would that mean about my life and what i could even amount to and what kind of legacy would i leave behind if that was true and everybody has different fears for different reasons some people's core belief is you know i'm incapable you know and that to them is paralyzing like man if i wasn't capable like that could ruin my life you know and it's not that they actually believe they're incapable but it's just like oh my gosh if that was true the consequences to my life would be devastating and i wouldn't even be able to tolerate it and so this is sort of what we're working with and i always say when we get to our core belief it doesn't necessarily have to be your core belief but let's let's work with it let's see if it is you know part of this is sort of like hypothesis testing like let's work with that and see if that could be true for you okay when people have core beliefs they usually then have conditional rules and assumptions about how the world will work and how they should act within that world so what i mean by this is when you have such a core belief like i'm worthless or i'm unlovable there will be certain things that you believe are scripts that you have to follow in order to have any semblance of emotional safety or to prevent yourself from having that core belief come true and so we're going to talk about what some of those things could be for you when somebody has a worthless core belief what might that do in terms of your expression of your needs and wants to other people like what rule might you have if you actually believe that you might be worthless or that you fear that that might be true what kind of rule would you put on yourself in terms of how you could communicate your needs and wants to others?

Client£ºwell i would uh...

Client£ºi would probably only in terms of a romantic relationship i would probably only date someone who i felt was like below my league i guess yeah that's a rude thing to say but um it's honest and i think you're not um alone in that um because if i if if i truly was worthless then i would need to be with somebody else who couldn't see that who would never know that i was worthless right and so i would need to date um accordingly right um i i wouldn't go after the people that i actually wanted to date because they're too smart to figure it out right that's at least that would be like a possible thinking there.

host£ºyeah and and i would also uh try to show my worth a lot even though i believed i'm worthless i would try to show well look at the great house i have and look at how happy i'm being and look how fun my friends are and look at my cool job and look at look at look at look at see i'm not worthless i'm not worthless i'm not worthless.

Client£ºright yeah no those are um excellent um examples of the types of rules you might have when that is your core belief and might you also have a type of rule where you felt like in certain situations you had to contribute something so that there would be worth so like even in friendships for example like how are you like always about them as opposed to oh now we can talk about me for 20 minutes right do you find yourself sometimes doing that with your friends?

host£ºyes.

Client£ºokay i'm always forever for as long as i can remember constantly making sure that the other person was happy with our interaction first professionally friendship romantic familial are you happy with our interaction constantly i i constantly remember thinking are you happy about this because i want to make sure you're happy about this because i don't want you to have an interaction with me where you're not happy.

host£ºright right okay so again another great example of a possible assumption or rule that you might put on yourself when this is the core belief and so as you might imagine there's a long list of these if we sat here for two hours we could probably come up with like 20 other rules that probably play some role in your life but i want to move on to the problem-solving phase you know because that's what cbt is all about it's like let's solve the problem so.

Client£ºyeah i love that part wow so we've identified the issue and there's been very many different ways in which you can work with your core beliefs but you have to remember that these core beliefs have been there for a long time and they're kind of pervasive like this idea of i'm worthless as you just demonstrated it's not just about your romantic relationships it's about how you interact with friends with professional people with colleagues whatever there's permeating of sorts in almost all the domains of your life and so what we're going to do now is one of my favorite ways to work with core beliefs and assumptions once we've identified them and that is to create an individualized behavioral experiment okay to try to see if your core beliefs and the assumptions that follow them actually apply to every single situation as i mentioned core beliefs feel pervasive and we want to make them more conditional you know we want to make it so that well you know in certain situations and with certain people they may make me feel this way and maybe that even comes from childhood but it doesn't apply to every single thing right and the way that we shake that is to actually get evidence cbt is a scientific program and this is kind of like our mini science experiment that we're going to do together.

host£ºso there's only a couple of rules for this experiment we're going to design an experiment around one of your rules or assumptions and the one that i want to use which i think is a good one to do because you want to start with a lower hanging fruit that's not too activating but we shouldn't start with the rule of you dating people who might be of a different level than you because that one is a little bit deeper but we start with something that feels like you can approach it and there's a little bit of risk it makes you a little uncomfortable but not like the worst thing that could happen and i think that that would apply to the rule of i always have to take care of other people's needs first because there's a lot of people that applies to it it can apply to your intimate relationships but it can also apply to friends colleagues anybody else that you meet so let's take that rule and let's try to test it with a person in your life and i would also say that again this person should not be the most activating person but this should be a person who there's some stakes in it there's some skin in the game but this is not a person in which if this experiment failed meaning that like you tried to challenge this assumption and they failed it in some way and actually made your core belief feel more significant to you that you would feel bad about it but you wouldn't be so bad that you would be in pieces so is there a person like that who you're like huh like i've always taken care of this person's needs first like as i usually do and...

Client£ºi could probably test something out with them and if it didn't work out i'd be kind of sad about it but like i wouldn't be devastated.

host£ºum hmm well i i have a friend in mind.

Client£ºokay great okay and so this is somebody that how long have you known this friend?

host£ºten, ten more than ten years.

Client£ºoh wow okay so ten years yeah um but we're not like every day friends right?

host£ºyeah but you guys have been familiar and like most of the times you're probably taking care of this friend right? how are you like oh let me give you advice like what can i bring you you're sick like that kind of relationship?

Client£ºall right so this experiment is going to be very time limited it's going to be very specific so i need you to set like a specific date and time that you're going to do this in the next seven days.

host£ºoh okay yeah it was going to be real specific because we need to get that data and it's going to be something that's kind of uh contained meaning it should be something where it's not like a free-for-all like from now on i'm just going to be you know word vomit and always tell them all about my problems first but it's more about okay in this particular conversation i'm going to go with him with the problem and once i talk about the problem get his advice i'm going to be like that was so helpful thank you goodbye and not make that about him at all because that's the other thing where with your type of poor belief and assumptions sometimes you'll be like and how are you and then you spend another 45 minutes dealing with that.

Client£ºabsolutely.

host£ºso we're not going to do that this is literally going to be you going to him to express a need of yours to express a problem have this person give you the advice and then be like thank you that was super helpful talk to you later.

Client£ºso that's the experiment and i have to go do that and you have to go do that.

host£ºand then what are you expecting me to report back with so first we're going to predict how you think that's going to go so based on your beliefs or maybe your assumptions and rules like how do you think that might go like in terms of maybe how you might feel or what they might feel or do?

Client£ºwell i mean i think it will go fine.

host£ºokay do you think that he's gonna have some kind of inner judgment of you like kyle selfish he didn't even ask about me today?

Client£ºum i mean maybe i don't know.

host£ºyeah well let's get specific and do you think that that's a possibility?

Client£ºyes.

host£ºokay yes and you obviously don't want that to be anybody's thoughts about you.

Client£ºno.

host£ºokay all right so you're gonna hold you're gonna hold that distress a little bit for yourself and then you said it's gonna probably go fine meaning like you think you can carry it through but it might make you a little uncomfortable.

Client£ºyeah and i'm hoping i don't slip up and start being like and how are you and go oh well i'm sorry that you went through something you know like and then just complete turn around.

host£ºyeah yeah exactly okay so we've laid out a couple of expectations one is well i'm sure he'll be fine with giving me the advice but maybe in his mind he'll be like whoa kyle's being selfish today like didn't even ask about how i am and then also you might just feel kind of like icky and then you're afraid that you might like break and just start to like take care of him so you feel better about yourself again.

Client£ºexactly.

host£ºso those are the expectations all right so then you're going to do this experiment so when do you think you can do something like this?

Client£ºgive me a day.

host£ºokay.

Client£ºtomorrow.

host£ºand then what problem do you think you're going to bring him?

Client£ºum i'll bring him uh uh a just i'm so stressed out i'm so busy.

host£ºokay which is true.

Client£ºthat's great so you'll just talk about that and oh my gosh i need help with this.

host£ºyeah like it's it's it's on a level that i've never experienced before.

Client£ºokay great that's perfect and then we'll kind of keep it time limited so how long do you think the conversation will be just give us 15 minutes.

host£ºperfect okay and remember we're not gonna make it another 20 minutes.

Client£ºokay awesome so then we're going to do this and we've already talked about the expectations and after you do it i wanna i want you to do two things one is i want you to actually ask him at the end of that conversation was this okay with you that today we just talked about me i'm just really stressed you literally ask him that very specific question because you want to get some level of feedback of course he can still lie to you but it at least gives you some semblance of what he might be thinking and i don't think he's expecting that kind of question from you.

Client£ºno.

host£ºso he'd be like hey i gotta run because i'm busy but just so just so i know like was this okay that i called you just to get your advice today and we didn't get to talk about how you're doing?

Client£ºi can do that.

host£ºokay cool.

Client£ºi can totally do that.

host£ºawesome so then he'll give you some feedback about that you will write that down and you will write down just your feelings leading up to it like was it that discomforting and then once you get that feedback from him how did you feel then and i will say that what i'm expecting is this guy's been your friend for 10 years that he's probably gonna be like dude it's cool like that's what friends are for something like that and then using that experience we're going to now go back to your assumptions again and say did that assumption really hold i mean do you always have to take care of people or are there at least certain people in your life who you can have it back and forth with and this is the first step then we do another experiment with a different person and a different kind of...

host£ºexperiment so that we can loosen these assumptions make them more conditional and that will feed back to that core belief like is it truly as universal as you think it is and that's really going to be the process so it'll take a few weeks for us to execute it all the way through but this is the first step and i think if you can do this first step it's going to start to shake that assumption enough for the rest of our work.

Client£ºwow cool right it's really good it's going to be fun now now i'm like morphing into kyle kittleson yeah that do i do i need to be patient anymore no okay.

host£ºthat is um really good because i was really committed to the patient role you know yeah and i was like where is she going with this like i'm just talking about how i don't feel like i'll ever find love and she wants me to go complain to a friend yeah you know and so i was like this has got to come together somehow but it definitely did yeah.

Client£ºyeah and it's really i mean again it's a process so the core belief was it was a process to develop that core belief yeah but the more that you can design these behavioral experiments to challenge the specific assumptions and to realize that those assumptions don't hold yes then the core beliefs get shaken because it's like wait if this assumption doesn't hold and there are people who like seem to love me for me even if i'm being a little negative today or a little selfish today whatever it is that i'm labeling this as in my head yeah what does that mean about me truly being unlovable am i really unlovable yeah or is it that i just have to find the right people to like.

host£ºyeah yeah yeah and it's such a good thing to note or realize that a core belief does not mean necessarily that it is true it is just your belief hidden way deep down on the iceberg and it's more like your fear like dude if this was true.

Client£ºthat was nice.

host£ºi want our youtube viewers i want you to leave a comment if you watched the entire session because it was a little longer than normal so i want to know who watched that act that whole session and then if you feel comfortable enough i want you to share one of your core beliefs or or something that you believe is a core belief um because we all have them like dr judy said we all have them but they're they're living down there unnoticed and they're affecting every part of our life yeah and through cbt therapy we can uncover something that's deep deep deep within us and bring light on it right and bring awareness to it and just that awareness changes everything absolutely everything that's what starts everything that's what starts you on the right path.

Client£ºyes if you got motivated watching this go to medcircle.com and check out the entire series on cognitive behavioral therapy.

host£ºdr judy amazing thank you thank you thank you thank you that's great i'm kyle kiddleson remember whatever you're going through you got this.

Client£ºthanks for watching if you liked what you just saw then why not subscribe click right here for new episodes and new series every week and to access exclusive mental health videos that we only release at medcircle.com check out the links below.

Case 3:

Therapist: So, Liz, I want to come back to something that you said earlier, when you were talking about feeling triggered and then going gambling.

On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: I wonder how far back she first felt triggered? When did she then make the decision to gamble?

Liz: Um, okay.

Therapist: So can you tell me a little bit more about what was going on when you first noticed that you were feeling triggered?

Liz: Well, I was leaving a friend¡¯s house, um, and I was thinking about, you know, which way to go home, because of traffic, you know, and I decided to take the highway.

On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: I wonder if there is more to the highway than it just being the fastest way home?

Therapist: So, you chose to take the highway because it was the fastest route home?

Liz: Well, yeah, sort of. No, I mean, I think I knew the highway went right past the casino.

Therapist: So you realized that the highway would go right by the casino and you wanted to see how that would feel?

Liz: Um, I think I knew the highway went past the casino I just wanted to go gambling because nobody was going to be home for a few hours and I wanted to see if I could win back some of my money to cover some debt.

On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: Those are quite a few triggers--I wonder if she realizes it was a perfect storm?

Therapist: So it sounds like you were looking to test out personal control because you haven¡¯t gambled in a while and you have a pretty big debt load.

Liz: Yeah. I thought, maybe, I could just go for an hour or so and be okay. Therapist: Okay. And that didn't quite go as you thought?
Liz: No. I ended up staying for, like, eight hours, and losing all my money, that I had saved in my bank account from not gambling for a month. So I'm deeper in debt, my partner knows that I relapsed, because I stayed out for so long. I'm so stupid.
 
On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: How can I turn this into a learning opportunity for her and get her to move through some of her guilt?

Therapist: Okay. Let's take this moment and look back some of the other situations that you¡¯ve found yourself in, and some of the previous work that we¡¯ve done together. Here are some of the situations that you've struggled with in the past that we've both identified. First we've got money, having it and then being in debt. And then we have time alone, and feeling like you've got things under control. And then we have feeling scrutinized by your partner. And we have being bored. Now, in this particular situation, you've identified that you were feeling pretty good about your ability to only gamble for a bit as well as the fact that you had money and time alone. Now, let¡¯s work through each one of those two thoughts on their own, and then we'll combine them, and we'll see how you gave yourself permission to gamble with those.

On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: Examining each individual thought may hep her understand how these thoughts influenced her behaviour.

Liz: Well, I was thinking that I hadn't gambled in a month and it'd been pretty easy to stay away for that long so I thought maybe I don't have a problem. So I wanted to gamble like a regular person, you know, just go in for a bit and then leave.

On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: She really wanted to test her personal control and to check and see if she really does have a gambling problem.

Therapist: So, so you were wanting to test out personal control as well as test whether or not you really have a gambling problem?

Liz: Yeah. And it didn't go so well. I ended up staying way longer and spending way more money than I'd planned to. I feel so bad. My partner's pissed. And now I'm deeper debt, and I made the situation worse again. I, I can't figure out why I keep doing this to myself.

On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: We need to break this thought process down to better understand it.

Therapist: It sounds like you noticed that, after a month, you were doing really well, in respect to your gambling goals. So you decided to test your own limits, and went gambling. Have I got that right?

Liz: Yeah. And that seems to be something that I do in my other areas in my life, like school, work, and other stuff.

Therapist: Let's come back to this one thought: "I have my gambling under control". Now let's work through that thought, right, and we'll use the Changing Your Thinking worksheet, and we'll use it the way that we've worked through some of the other thoughts that we've worked through in the past. Okay, so what we're going to do is
 
we're going to look at that irrational thought, okay, the irrational thought, and then we'll look at a couple of specifics of that thought, and then we'll explore a rational thought that we can use to replace it.

Liz: Okay.

Therapist: So, if the irrational thought is, ¡°My gambling is under control,¡± what might be two specific ways that that thought is irrational?

Liz: Uh, well, clearly my gambling's not under control. Uh, when I go to a casino and start gambling, I can't stop until I run out of money.

Therapist: So your recent example of going to the casino and losing track of your spending and then spending until you run right out of money: those two things give evidence as to why that thought is irrational.

Liz: Yeah, and I think when I tell myself that I think it's a sign that I'm not thinking properly, and that I probably already made the decision to start gambling.

Therapist: So if you were to counter, then, that irrational thought, that irrational statement with a rational one, what might that one sound like?

Liz: Well, maybe a more rational thought would be, "My gambling habits are still fragile", or, uh, "It's easy for me to lose control once I start gambling".

Case 4: 
Therapist: So, Liz, I want to come back to something that you said earlier, when you were talking about feeling triggered and then going gambling.
On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: I wonder how far back she first felt triggered? When did she then make the decision to gamble?
Liz: Um, okay.
Therapist: So can you tell me a little bit more about what was going on when you first noticed that you were feeling triggered?
Liz: Well, I was leaving a friend¡¯s house, um, and I was thinking about, you know, which way to go home, because of traffic, you know, and I decided to take the highway.
On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: I wonder if there is more to the highway than it just being the fastest way home?
Therapist: So, you chose to take the highway because it was the fastest route home?
Liz: Well, yeah, sort of. No, I mean, I think I knew the highway went right past the casino.
Therapist: So you realized that the highway would go right by the casino, and you wanted to see how that would feel?
Liz: Um, I think I knew the highway went past the casino. I just wanted to go gambling because nobody was going to be home for a few hours, and I wanted to see if I could win back some of my money to cover some debt.
On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: Those are quite a few triggers--I wonder if she realizes it was a perfect storm?
Therapist: So it sounds like you were looking to test out personal control because you haven¡¯t gambled in a while, and you have a pretty big debt load.
Liz: Yeah. I thought, maybe, I could just go for an hour or so and be okay.
Therapist: Okay. And that didn't quite go as you thought?
Liz: No. I ended up staying for, like, eight hours, and losing all my money that I had saved in my bank account from not gambling for a month. So now I¡¯m deeper in debt, and my partner knows that I relapsed because I stayed out for so long. I'm so stupid.
learn.problemgambling.ca
On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: How can I turn this into a learning opportunity for her and get her to move through some of her guilt?
Therapist: Okay. Let's take this moment and look back at some of the other situations that you¡¯ve found yourself in and the previous work that we¡¯ve done together. Here are some of the situations that you've struggled with in the past that we've both identified: money (having it, then being in debt), time alone, feeling in control, feeling scrutinized by your partner, and boredom. Now, in this situation, you were feeling pretty good about your ability to only gamble for a bit, as well as the fact that you had money and time alone. Let¡¯s work through each of those two thoughts on their own, then combine them, and we¡¯ll see how you gave yourself permission to gamble.
On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: Examining each individual thought may help her understand how these thoughts influenced her behavior.
Liz: Well, I was thinking that I hadn't gambled in a month, and it'd been pretty easy to stay away for that long, so I thought maybe I don't have a problem. I wanted to gamble like a regular person, you know, just go in for a bit and then leave.
On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: She really wanted to test her personal control and to check if she really has a gambling problem.
Therapist: So, you were wanting to test out personal control and to see whether or not you really have a gambling problem?
Liz: Yeah. And it didn't go so well. I ended up staying way longer and spending way more money than I'd planned to. I feel so bad. My partner's pissed. And now I¡¯m in deeper debt, and I made the situation worse again. I, I can't figure out why I keep doing this to myself.
On-screen text: Therapist's Thoughts: We need to break this thought process down to better understand it.
Therapist: It sounds like you noticed that, after a month, you were doing really well with your gambling goals. So you decided to test your limits and went gambling. Have I got that right?
Liz: Yeah. And that seems to be something that I do in other areas of my life, like school, work, and other stuff.
Therapist: Let's come back to this one thought: "I have my gambling under control." We¡¯ll work through that thought and use the Changing Your Thinking worksheet, just like we¡¯ve done with other thoughts in the past.
learn.problemgambling.ca
Therapist: So, we¡¯re going to look at that irrational thought, okay? Then we'll explore specifics of that thought and examine a rational thought to replace it.
Liz: Okay.
Therapist: So, if the irrational thought is ¡°My gambling is under control,¡± what might be two specific ways that thought is irrational?
Liz: Well, clearly my gambling's not under control. When I go to a casino and start gambling, I can't stop until I run out of money.
Therapist: So, your recent example of going to the casino, losing track of your spending, and continuing until you ran out of money¡ªthese give evidence as to why that thought is irrational.
Liz: Yeah, and I think when I tell myself that, it's a sign that I'm not thinking properly and that I probably already made the decision to start gambling.
Therapist: So if you were to counter that irrational thought with a rational one, what might that sound like?
Liz: Well, maybe a more rational thought would be, "My gambling habits are still fragile," or, "It's easy for me to lose control once I start gambling."

Case 5:
Judith: Hi. Good to see you again.
Abe: Hi.
MOOD CHECK
Judith: Can I take a look at your scores?
Abe: Sure.
Judith: While I'm looking at these, just tell me, in your own words, how you've been feeling this week.
Abe: Well, I would say I think a little bit better. I don't know if I know exactly why, but I feel a little bit better.
[Dr. Beck will return to why he thinks he¡¯s a little better to reinforce the idea that the change is due to his change in thinking and behavior.]
Abe: When I woke up in the morning, I was able to get up more easily. I think that when I was just reading the paper, even the sports section, I felt like I was able to concentrate a little better.
[Dr. Beck uses this positive data later and provides positive reinforcement throughout the session.]
Judith: Oh, that's wonderful. I'm really glad to hear that. It looks like you're sleeping better too?
Abe: Well, I think that what I meant by that was mostly that I didn't oversleep.
Judith: Okay.
Abe: Because I had been spending a lot of time in bed. I would say I got up at 7:00 a.m., but I didn't really get up at 7:00 a.m.
Judith: Oh, that's great. That's great. Looks like your concentration on things, like reading the newspaper, you said, that's a little better, too?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Oh, I'm really glad. You said you don't have any idea as to why you're feeling better?
Abe: Maybe that's not entirely fair. Maybe it's because of the things that we're doing here that are helping.
Judith: Oh, that's great.
SETTING THE AGENDA
Judith: We'll get to those things in just a minute, but let's set the agenda. What would be your goal for today's session?
Abe: Well, I guess to start thinking about working on the things that make it difficult for me to do things to get better. Like we talked about going out and doing things. And last time we talked about what I would like to be doing, like by Labor Day.
[Having Abe think concretely and create an image about how his life could improve by a certain date gave him hope that his life could get better.]
Judith: What's something that you would like to be able to do, but you've been having trouble doing? With something, either going out, or in the apartment.
[¡°Thinking about working on difficult things is too broad,¡± so Dr. Beck helps him be more specific.]
Abe: Well, it's kind of like the evenings are really hard for me because even if I go out and do something, then at the end of the day, I go back and I'm there by myself. Then I'm just sort of there with my thoughts.
[Dr. Beck labels the goal as ¡°evenings,¡± that is, to change his behavior and thinking at those times.]
Judith: Good, okay, so we'll try to get to evenings. Anything else? Any other goals you have?
Abe: I would say that that's probably the main thing. Well, I should do something about my apartment. I don't keep after that like I should.
Judith: You want to get your apartment in better order?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Okay.
Abe: But that seems like such a big job. I don't know where to start.
[Dr. Beck emphasizes teamwork.]
Judith: Well, maybe we could figure out together where to start.
Abe: Okay.
Judith: That sounds good.
[Dr. Beck keeps track of what they¡¯re doing and then contributes to the agenda herself.]
Judith: So, we're setting the agenda. I'd also like to talk a little bit more about these depressing thoughts that you've been having, and talk some more about credit, if that's okay.
Abe: Okay.
REVIEWING THERAPY NOTES: PART ONE
[It¡¯s not enough for clients to read the therapy notes on their Action Plans (formerly called homework) every day. It¡¯s important to reinforce them in future sessions by asking for their reaction to them.]
Judith: What I'd like to do next is just to turn to the notes from, actually, from the evaluation, and then the notes from last session.
Abe: Okay.
Judith: (being collaborative) If it's all right, I'll just read this and I'd like you to tell me what you think about this now. "When I start to feel more depressed, remind myself that the therapy plan makes sense." Does it still make sense to you?
Abe: Yes, it does.
Judith: "With Judith's help, I'll be working toward goals every week, step by step. I'll learn how to evaluate my thinking, which might be 100 percent true, or zero percent true, or someplace in the middle." What do you think about that?
Abe: Well, I think the idea of working toward goals every week is a good idea. I think that your helping me to figure out what those things are is good. If I evaluate my thinking, which may be 100 percent, or not, or somewhere in the middle-
Judith: We really haven't done that yet; help you evaluate your thinking. We've just been identifying your thinking. But does it make sense to you that you might still be seeing the world through black glasses?
Abe: Mostly.
Judith: Yes. Not all your thoughts are 100 percent true.
Abe: I think most of my thoughts are, but when I go out and do things, then I feel better when I'm doing them.
Judith: That's terrific.
Abe: I don't have as many black dots now.
Judith: Yes. It sounds like this next part is true, then? "The way I'll feel better is by making small changes in my thinking and behavior every day"?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Excellent. We covered it just a little bit last session, so I want to talk about it more this session. "Give myself credit for doing things on the Action Plan, for doing anything else that helps me get over the depression, and for anything that's even a little bit difficult, but I do it anyway." Were you any better at giving yourself credit this week?
Abe: I think so. Last week, I hadn't really done that much that I really felt that I deserved any credit. But I tried to push myself this week and do the things we talked about, so yeah. I was better because I was able to recognize that.
Judith: That's great.
Abe: I was pushing myself and doing it.
Judith: In a few minutes, maybe we'll talk about keeping a credit list, so we'll get to that, too.
UPDATE (BEST PART OF THE WEEK) AND DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
Judith: Okay. So, again, what was the best part of this past week? Or, when did you feel the best? When were you at your best?
Abe: Well, all of the things, just going out for a walk is better than sitting on the couch. But I went out with my grandson again, and that was good.
Judith: Ethan again?
Abe: Ethan.
Judith: What did you do with him?
Abe: We just went out and got ice cream again.
[Dr. Beck becomes conversational, trying to lighten the mood and show interest.]
Judith: Vanilla?
Abe: I tried a different flavor this time.
Judith: Did you? What did you try?
Abe: It was a chocolate swirl thing. It was different.
Judith: Which do you like better? The vanilla the week before?
Abe: I don't know.
Judith: About the same.
Abe: I like trying something new.
Judith: Good for you. So, you were at your best when you took Ethan for ice cream again?
Abe: Yeah.
[Dr. Beck helps Abe draw positive conclusions about the experience.]
Judith: What was good about taking him for ice cream?
Abe: I think it's just fun to be with him and just talk about stuff, and to feel kind of like a normal person.
Judith: Yeah. So, you felt less depressed when you were out with him?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Yeah. That's good. Does that imply that actually you might be able to do things that can help you feel better?
Abe: I guess so.
[Dr. Beck asks a question so Abe will conclude that this difficult action had become easier.]
Judith: Was it easy to go out with him, or was it still hard?
Abe: It was easier than the first time. It was a lot easier than the first time.
Judith: Oh, good. I'm glad.
Abe: I still have some questions, but it was a lot easier.
REINFORCING THE COGNITIVE MODEL
[Dr. Beck next seeks an explanation for why this action was easier, identifies an adaptive cognition that was different from what he had previously thought, and subtly reinforces the cognitive model.]
Judith: If it was easier, it makes me think that your thinking must have been different. What were you thinking when you were getting ready to go out with him?
Abe: I was thinking, "Well, last time went pretty good, so, no reason to think that this time won't be good too." So, I was just sort of more able to look forward to it as I was going to do it.
Judith: That's terrific. This time you were making a positive prediction and your mood was better?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: And it made it easier to go out.
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Okay. I want to just get back to the therapy notes from last week, too. Were you able to read these every day?
Abe: I did, yeah. I read it every day.
Judith: Were you able to pull them out any other times during the day? I'm not sure we even asked you to do that.
Abe: After I got up in the morning and took a shower and stuff, I would read it.
Judith: Right, right. Okay. So, tell me what you think of this [reading]: "When I criticize myself, remember, I'm only looking at part of the scene, and it's through black glasses. Judy says it's not my fault. It's happening because I have depression."
Abe: I think that there's some truth to that.
Judith: Uh-huh [nods ¡°yes¡±]. Do you think you're accepting this fact more, that you do have a real illness? Last week, I think it was a hard thing to even think about.
Abe: I think that was the first time that I really thought about it in that way. When you went down and read the list of things to me,
[Dr. Beck had shown him the diagnostic criteria in the DSM.]
Abe: I could say, "Yeah, that's me."
Judith: That's you.
Abe: So, I think that it's in a book, it must mean something.
Judith: Yeah. Are you thinking now that your condition is more like pneumonia?
[Dr. Beck had given him an analogy, helping him conclude that he would have had some of the same symptoms--low energy, low motivation, difficulty pushing himself¡ªif he had pneumonia. But he wouldn¡¯t have criticized himself for these symptoms. This psychoeducation helped him see that he had a very real condition, which, in turn, helped him to be less self-critical.]
Abe: I guess so.
Judith: Something that happens that has these really negative symptoms, makes everything harder?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Then we talked about, last week, about how your thinking influences how you feel and what you do. Were you able to catch any of those automatic thoughts this week? I don't think I even called them automatic. They're just your depressed thoughts.
Abe: Just my thoughts. Yeah.
Judith: Did you catch any this week?
Abe: Yeah. I guess the worst one was like when I said that sitting on the couch is hard, so when I was sitting there, there would be times when I would think that I'm not going to get better.
Judith: Uh-huh [nods ¡°yes¡±]. When you had that thought, how did that make you feel?
Abe: Bad.
[Dr. Beck doesn¡¯t ask him to specify what ¡°bad¡± means because she wants to emphasize a different point.]
Judith: Were you able to remind yourself at all that just because you think something, doesn't necessarily mean it's true?
Abe: Yeah, I did. I can't say I believe that 100 percent, but I believe it more than I did in the beginning.
Judith: Okay. That's good.
Abe: Then, probably in my weaker moments, I said, "This isn't going to work."
Judith: Uh-huh [nods ¡°yes¡±]. Meaning this therapy?
Abe: This therapy and all that. So, I went out and had ice cream with my grandson.
[expressing additional automatic thoughts]
Abe: Well, I ought to be doing that anyway. I went for a walk. Well, I ought to be doing that anyway.
Judith: So, you got really self-critical?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Yeah. All right. I think I'll come back to the rest of the Action Plan in a few minutes.
[Dr. Beck decides not to address the self-criticism directly at this point, but instead to teach Abe a technique to counteract self-criticism. His previous Action Plan had been to give himself credit. Now Dr. Beck will help him do this in an organized way that will help him focus more strongly on this task and remember what he has identified.]
KEEPING A CREDIT LIST
Judith: Let's talk about a credit list, [being collaborative] if that's all right?
Abe: Okay.
Judith: It seems to me that you've lost a lot of confidence in yourself.
[Dr. Beck summarizes his difficulties in a normalizing, non-pathological way.]
Abe: Losing my job really hurt.
Judith: Yes. It seems to me you've lost confidence in a lot of ways. You've lost confidence about your ability to work. You're afraid that even if you got a job, you wouldn't do it very well. Seems like you've lost confidence in your ability to keep your apartment in order. Lost confidence in how other people might view you. It makes it harder to get together with friends. Do you think I'm right about this?
Abe: Yeah. And we haven't even talked much about my ex-wife. About the fact that the marriage failed. That's pretty bad too.
Judith: Well, it's not surprising that you've lost confidence in yourself.
[providing psychoeducation]
Judith: Because that's what depression really does. It really makes you lose confidence. It would be really, really important for you to recognize that you are taking steps to take control of your life again.
Abe: Yeah.
[Dr. Beck provides a rationale.]
Judith: That's why I'd like you to keep a credit list, in writing, if you can. You could just keep it on any kind of piece of paper, or you could keep this credit list on a three-by-five card that you keep in your pocket, or you could keep a list on your phone.
Abe: This is just like my saying ¡°Good job¡± to myself?
Judith: Yeah, exactly. Exactly. This is when I want you to do it. We talked a little bit about this at the evaluation.
[Dr. Beck reminds Abe of the guideline for giving himself credit.]
Judith: Whenever you do anything that's even a little bit difficult, but you do it anyway, you deserve credit for that.
Abe: Okay.
Judith: Should I write that down on your Action Plan for you?
Abe: Yeah.
[Dr. Beck writes the item on Abe¡¯s Action Plan and returns to the analogy of pneumonia.]
Judith: Now, if you had pneumonia, and yet you were able to get yourself out of bed, you were able to go to the supermarket, you were able to put in a load of laundry, would you think you deserve credit for it?
Abe: Yeah. Only because, even though I think I'm supposed to do them, I haven't done them for a long time.
Judith: That's exactly right. The depression has been so severe, it's been so hard for you to do these things.
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: It sounds to me as if you've done some things this week that were even a little bit difficult, but you did them anyway. Is that right?
Abe: Yeah. Going for the walks, and I walked by the church one day, too.
Judith: Oh, that's great. All right, so we can start your credit list right now. Should I give you a piece of paper?
Abe: I can write it on here.
Judith: Okay. So, you said this week you walked by the church?
Abe: Mm-hmm [nods ¡°yes¡±].
Judith: It was easier to take your grandson out for ice cream. Was it easy?
Abe: Not easy, but easier.
Judith: Okay, so if it was even a little bit difficult, then it goes on the list. Took Ethan out for ice cream.
[It¡¯s a good idea to have clients practice writing the list in session by having them reflect on what they already did that day. Starting an Action Plan like this in the session makes it far more likely that the client will continue it at home.]
Judith: What did you even do today that was a little bit difficult, but you did it anyway?
Abe: Well, yeah, I don't know that this was even on the list, but when I... After I got up and took my shower this morning, I straightened up a couple things in the apartment.
Judith: Oh, that's great. Was that even a little bit difficult?
Abe: It was really hard.
Judith: Okay, so write that on your list.
Abe: I didn't make a big dent in everything that needs to be done, I just moved them around a little bit. Kind of make it a clearer path to walk through.
[Dr. Beck is careful not to get sidetracked by asking more about this topic at this point, especially since Abe had put it on the agenda and she knows they will get to it later.]
Judith: Right. We have that on our agenda to talk more about today. But you did some things around the apartment, and we hadn't even talked about your doing that. Was it good that you did that, or would it have been better if you hadn't done it?
Abe: It was good I did it.
Judith: It was good you did it, so it absolutely belongs on the list. How about getting out of bed? Was that easy today?
Abe: It was a lot easier. I wake up, and lots of times I just stay in bed. But what I've been trying to do is push myself to actually get out of bed when I wake up at 7:00 a.m.
Judith: I see, instead of lying in bed.
Abe: So, I pushed myself and got up.
Judith: All right. So, can you write down, "Got out of bed"?
[Given what Abe said earlier in the session, Dr. Beck anticipates that he will have a similar automatic thought that could interfere with a recognition that he deserves credit for doing this. She normalizes a very common thought.]
Judith: A lot of people say, "Well, why do I deserve credit for getting out of bed, it's just what I should do?" Is that something you were thinking?
Abe: Oh, yeah.
[Dr. Beck uses self-disclosure to encourage Abe to give himself credit.]
Judith: Okay. So, I have to tell you that every morning when I get out of bed, I give myself credit. Because I would much rather turn off the alarm and go back to sleep, but I don't. And I say, "Well, it's good you got up." And I'm not even depressed.
Abe: Okay.
Judith: So, Abe, once you're over the depression, it will be your choice as to whether you give yourself credit for getting out of bed or not. But while it's still even a little bit difficult, it's really important.
Abe: Okay.

Case 6: 
Judith: Hi. Good to see you again.
Abe: Hi.

Judith: Can I take a look at your scores?
Abe: Sure.
Judith: While I'm looking at these, just tell me, in your own words, how you've been feeling this week.
Abe: Well, I would say I think a little bit better. I don't know if I know exactly why, but I feel a little bit better.

[Dr. Beck will return to why he thinks he¡¯s a little better to reinforce the idea that the change is due to his change in thinking and behavior.]

Abe: When I woke up in the morning, I was able to get up more easily. I think that when I was just reading the paper, even the sports section, I felt like I was able to concentrate a little better.
[Dr. Beck uses this positive data later and provides positive reinforcement throughout the session.]

Judith: Oh, that's wonderful. I'm really glad to hear that. It looks like you're sleeping better too?
Abe: Well, I think that what I meant by that was mostly that I didn't oversleep.
Judith: Okay.
Abe: Because I had been spending a lot of time in bed. I would say I got up at 7:00 a.m., but I didn't really get up at 7:00 a.m.
Judith: Oh, that's great. That's great. Looks like your concentration on things, like reading the newspaper, you said, that's a little better, too?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Oh, I'm really glad. You said you don't have any idea as to why you're feeling better?
Abe: Maybe that's not entirely fair. Maybe it's because of the things that we're doing here that are helping.

[Dr. Beck will reinforce this later to strengthen the idea that Abe's improvement is due to changes in his thinking and behavior.]

Judith: Oh, that's great. We'll get to those things in just a minute, but let's set the agenda. What would be your goal for today's session?
Abe: Well, I guess to start thinking about working on the things that make it difficult for me to do things to get better. Like we talked about going out and doing things. And last time we talked about what I would like to be doing, like by Labor Day.

[Dr. Beck encourages Abe to set specific, actionable goals.]

Judith: What's something that you would like to be able to do, but you've been having trouble doing? With something, either going out, or in the apartment.
Abe: Well, it's kind of like the evenings are really hard for me because even if I go out and do something, then at the end of the day, I go back and I'm there by myself. Then I'm just sort of there with my thoughts.
Judith: Good, okay, so we'll try to get to evenings. Anything else? Any other goals you have?
Abe: I would say that that's probably the main thing. Well, I should do something about my apartment. I don't keep after that like I should.
Judith: You want to get your apartment in better order?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Okay.
Abe: But that seems like such a big job. I don't know where to start.
Judith: Well, maybe we could figure out together where to start.
Abe: Okay.
Judith: That sounds good. So, we're setting the agenda. I'd also like to talk a little bit more about these depressing thoughts that you've been having, and talk some more about credit, if that's okay.
Abe: Okay.

[In this part of the session, Dr. Beck helps Abe recognize his progress and begin taking credit for actions, however small, as steps toward regaining confidence.]

Judith: What I'd like to do next is just to turn to the notes from the evaluation, and then the notes from last session.
Abe: Okay.
Judith: (being collaborative) If it's all right, I'll just read this and I'd like you to tell me what you think about this now. "When I start to feel more depressed, remind myself that the therapy plan makes sense." Does it still make sense to you?
Abe: Yes, it does.
Judith: "With Judith's help, I'll be working toward goals every week, step by step. I'll learn how to evaluate my thinking, which might be 100 percent true, or zero percent true, or someplace in the middle." What do you think about that?
Abe: Well, I think the idea of working toward goals every week is a good idea. I think that your helping me to figure out what those things are is good. If I evaluate my thinking, which may be 100 percent, or not, or somewhere in the middle¡ª
Judith: We really haven't done that yet; help you evaluate your thinking. We've just been identifying your thinking. But does it make sense to you that you might still be seeing the world through black glasses?
Abe: Mostly.
Judith: Yes. Not all your thoughts are 100 percent true.
Abe: I think most of my thoughts are, but when I go out and do things, then I feel better when I'm doing them.

[Dr. Beck reinforces positive experiences and will later help Abe draw connections between actions and improved mood.]

Judith: That's terrific.
Abe: I don't have as many black dots now.
Judith: Yes. It sounds like this next part is true, then? "The way I'll feel better is by making small changes in my thinking and behavior every day"?
Abe: Yeah.

[Dr. Beck will help Abe understand and remember the link between small actions and gradual improvements in mood.]

Judith: Excellent. We covered it just a little bit last session, so I want to talk about it more this session. "Give myself credit for doing things on the Action Plan, for doing anything else that helps me get over the depression, and for anything that's even a little bit difficult, but I do it anyway." Were you any better at giving yourself credit this week?
Abe: I think so. Last week, I hadn't really done that much that I really felt that I deserved any credit. But I tried to push myself this week and do the things we talked about, so yeah. I was better because I was able to recognize that.

[Dr. Beck will encourage Abe to build this habit of recognizing his efforts, aiming to boost his confidence over time.]

Judith: That's great.
Abe: I was pushing myself and doing it.
Judith: In a few minutes, maybe we'll talk about keeping a credit list, so we'll get to that, too.

[Dr. Beck introduces the idea of a credit list as a structured way for Abe to track his progress and recognize his achievements.]
Judith: Okay. So, again, what was the best part of this past week? Or, when did you feel the best? When were you at your best?
Abe: Well, all of the things, just going out for a walk is better than sitting on the couch. But I went out with my grandson again, and that was good.
Judith: Ethan again?
Abe: Ethan.
Judith: What did you do with him?
Abe: We just went out and got ice cream again.

[Dr. Beck becomes conversational to lighten the mood and show interest.]

Judith: Vanilla?
Abe: I tried a different flavor this time.
Judith: Did you? What did you try?
Abe: It was a chocolate swirl thing. It was different.
Judith: Which do you like better? The vanilla the week before?
Abe: I don't know.
Judith: About the same.
Abe: I like trying something new.
Judith: Good for you. So, you were at your best when you took Ethan for ice cream again?
Abe: Yeah.

[Dr. Beck helps Abe draw positive conclusions about the experience.]

Judith: What was good about taking him for ice cream?
Abe: I think it's just fun to be with him and just talk about stuff, and to feel kind of like a normal person.
Judith: Yeah. So, you felt less depressed when you were out with him?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Yeah. That's good. Does that imply that actually you might be able to do things that can help you feel better?
Abe: I guess so.

[Dr. Beck asks a question so Abe will conclude that this difficult action had become easier.]

Judith: Was it easy to go out with him, or was it still hard?
Abe: It was easier than the first time. It was a lot easier than the first time.
Judith: Oh, good. I'm glad.
Abe: I still have some questions, but it was a lot easier.

[Dr. Beck seeks an explanation for why this action was easier and reinforces the cognitive model.]

Judith: If it was easier, it makes me think that your thinking must have been different. What were you thinking when you were getting ready to go out with him?
Abe: I was thinking, "Well, last time went pretty good, so, no reason to think that this time won't be good too." So, I was just sort of more able to look forward to it as I was going to do it.
Judith: That's terrific. This time you were making a positive prediction and your mood was better?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: And it made it easier to go out.
Abe: Yeah.

[Dr. Beck checks on how often Abe read his therapy notes and reviews the notes from the previous session.]

Judith: Okay. I want to just get back to the therapy notes from last week, too. Were you able to read these every day?
Abe: I did, yeah. I read it every day.
Judith: Were you able to pull them out any other times during the day? I'm not sure we even asked you to do that.
Abe: After I got up in the morning and took a shower and stuff, I would read it.
Judith: Right, right. Okay. So, tell me what you think of this [reading]: "When I criticize myself, remember, I'm only looking at part of the scene, and it's through black glasses. Judy says it's not my fault. It's happening because I have depression."
Abe: I think that there's some truth to that.
Judith: Uh-huh [nods ¡°yes¡±]. Do you think you're accepting this fact more, that you do have a real illness? Last week, I think it was a hard thing to even think about.
Abe: I think that was the first time that I really thought about it in that way. When you went down and read the list of things to me¡ª

[Dr. Beck had shown him the diagnostic criteria in the DSM.]

Abe: I could say, "Yeah, that's me."
Judith: That's you.
Abe: So, I think that it's in a book, it must mean something.
Judith: Yeah. Are you thinking now that your condition is more like pneumonia?

[Dr. Beck gives an analogy to help Abe conclude that his symptoms, like those from pneumonia, aren't his fault and that he would not have criticized himself if he had a physical illness.]

Abe: I guess so.
Judith: Something that happens that has these really negative symptoms, makes everything harder?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Then we talked about, last week, about how your thinking influences how you feel and what you do. Were you able to catch any of those automatic thoughts this week? I don't think I even called them automatic. They're just your depressed thoughts.
Abe: Just my thoughts. Yeah.
Judith: Did you catch any this week?
Abe: Yeah. I guess the worst one was like when I said that sitting on the couch is hard, so when I was sitting there, there would be times when I would think that I'm not going to get better.
Judith: Uh-huh [nods ¡°yes¡±]. When you had that thought, how did that make you feel?
Abe: Bad.

[Dr. Beck doesn¡¯t ask him to specify what ¡°bad¡± means because she wants to emphasize a different point.]

Judith: Were you able to remind yourself at all that just because you think something doesn't necessarily mean it's true?
Abe: Yeah, I did. I can't say I believe that 100 percent, but I believe it more than I did in the beginning.
Judith: Okay. That's good.
Abe: Then, probably in my weaker moments, I said, "This isn't going to work."
Judith: Uh-huh [nods ¡°yes¡±]. Meaning this therapy?
Abe: This therapy and all that. So, I went out and had ice cream with my grandson. [expressing additional automatic thoughts] Well, I ought to be doing that anyway. I went for a walk. Well, I ought to be doing that anyway.
Judith: So, you got really self-critical?
Abe: Yeah.

[Dr. Beck decides not to address the self-criticism directly but to teach Abe a technique to counteract it later in the session.]

Judith: Let's talk about a credit list, if that's all right?
Abe: Okay.
Judith: It seems to me that you've lost a lot of confidence in yourself.

[Dr. Beck summarizes his difficulties non-judgmentally to normalize his experience.]

Abe: Losing my job really hurt.
Judith: Yes. It seems to me you've lost confidence in a lot of ways. You've lost confidence about your ability to work. You're afraid that even if you got a job, you wouldn't do it very well. Seems like you've lost confidence in your ability to keep your apartment in order. Lost confidence in how other people might view you. It makes it harder to get together with friends. Do you think I'm right about this?
Abe: Yeah. And we haven't even talked much about my ex-wife. About the fact that the marriage failed. That's pretty bad too.

[Dr. Beck provides psychoeducation about how depression affects self-confidence.]

Judith: Well, it's not surprising that you've lost confidence in yourself because that's what depression really does. It really makes you lose confidence. It would be really, really important for you to recognize that you are taking steps to take control of your life again.
Abe: Yeah.

[Dr. Beck provides a rationale for keeping a credit list to help rebuild Abe¡¯s confidence.]

Judith: That's why I'd like you to keep a credit list, in writing, if you can. You could just keep it on any kind of piece of paper, or you could keep this credit list on a three-by-five card that you keep in your pocket, or you could keep a list on your phone.
Abe: This is just like my saying "Good job" to myself?
Judith: Yeah, exactly. Exactly. This is when I want you to do it. We talked a little bit about this at the evaluation. Whenever you do anything that's even a little bit difficult, but you do it anyway, you deserve credit for that.
Abe: Okay.
Judith: Should I write that down on your Action Plan for you?
Abe: Yeah.

[Dr. Beck writes this on Abe¡¯s Action Plan and emphasizes the connection between depression and the difficulty of completing tasks.]

Judith: Now, if you had pneumonia, and yet you were able to get yourself out of bed, you were able to go to the supermarket, you were able to put in a load of laundry, would you think you deserve credit for it?
Abe: Yeah. Only because, even though I think I'm supposed to do them, I haven't done them for a long time.
Judith: That's exactly right. The depression has been so severe, it's been so hard for you to do these things.
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: It sounds to me as if you've done some things this week that were even a little bit difficult, but you did them anyway. Is that right?

[This section will continue, detailing how Dr. Beck encourages Abe to keep track of these small accomplishments as a strategy for building confidence.]
Abe: Yeah. Going for the walks, and I walked by the church one day, too.
Judith: Oh, that's great. All right, so we can start your credit list right now. Should I give you a piece of paper?
Abe: I can write it on here.
Judith: Okay. So, you said this week you walked by the church?
Abe: Mm-hmm [nods ¡°yes¡±].
Judith: It was easier to take your grandson out for ice cream. Was it easy?
Abe: Not easy, but easier.
Judith: Okay, so if it was even a little bit difficult, then it goes on the list. Took Ethan out for ice cream.

[Dr. Beck encourages Abe to practice listing his accomplishments, making it more likely he¡¯ll continue this at home.]

Judith: What did you even do today that was a little bit difficult, but you did it anyway?
Abe: Well, yeah, I don't know that this was even on the list, but when I... After I got up and took my shower this morning, I straightened up a couple things in the apartment.
Judith: Oh, that's great. Was that even a little bit difficult?
Abe: It was really hard.
Judith: Okay, so write that on your list.
Abe: I didn't make a big dent in everything that needs to be done, I just moved them around a little bit. Kind of made it a clearer path to walk through.

[Dr. Beck keeps the session on track, noting that they¡¯ll discuss more about the apartment later.]

Judith: Right. We have that on our agenda to talk more about today. But you did some things around the apartment, and we hadn't even talked about your doing that. Was it good that you did that, or would it have been better if you hadn't done it?
Abe: It was good I did it.
Judith: It was good you did it, so it absolutely belongs on the list. How about getting out of bed? Was that easy today?
Abe: It was a lot easier. I wake up, and lots of times I just stay in bed. But what I've been trying to do is push myself to actually get out of bed when I wake up at 7:00 a.m.
Judith: I see, instead of lying in bed.
Abe: So, I pushed myself and got up.
Judith: All right. So, can you write down, "Got out of bed"?

[Dr. Beck anticipates that Abe may feel he doesn¡¯t deserve credit for something as basic as getting out of bed and normalizes this thought.]

Judith: A lot of people say, "Well, why do I deserve credit for getting out of bed? It's just what I should do." Is that something you were thinking?
Abe: Oh, yeah.
Judith: Okay. So, I have to tell you that every morning when I get out of bed, I give myself credit. Because I would much rather turn off the alarm and go back to sleep, but I don't. And I say, "Well, it's good you got up." And I'm not even depressed.
Abe: Okay.
Judith: So, Abe, once you're over the depression, it will be your choice as to whether you give yourself credit for getting out of bed or not. But while it's still even a little bit difficult, it's really important.
Abe: Okay.

[Dr. Beck encourages Abe to recognize that giving himself credit builds his confidence.]

Judith: Can you see how giving yourself credit for these things might help you build up your confidence, show you that you are able to do things that are difficult?
Abe: I wasn't thinking about it that way, but I just kind of feel better thinking about it, that I'm doing those things. But I have to somehow remind myself that it has to do with building confidence, too.
Judith: Yes, that's good. Should I write that on your Action Plan, too?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: So, [writing] "When I do anything that's even a little bit difficult, give myself credit," and how should I phrase it? ¡°This will build my confidence¡±?
Abe: This will build my confidence.
Judith: [writing] "This will build my confidence." Anything else you did today that was even a little bit difficult?
Abe: No. I thought about doing something, but I didn't do it.

[Dr. Beck remains focused on the credit list, avoiding getting side-tracked.]

Judith: Uh-huh [nods ¡°yes¡¯]. How about coming to therapy today? Was that even a little bit difficult?
Abe: Yeah. Yeah.
Judith: Okay. That goes on your list too. So, "Came to therapy." So, we have a bunch of things that you did just even today, that you deserve credit for. Now, if you don't give yourself credit for those things, what happens?
Abe: Then I just think about it the same way I always did, that I ought to be doing that stuff anyway.
Judith: Yeah. So, you feel, what, guilty, you feel bad?
Abe: Feel bad, guilty, lazy, incompetent.
Judith: Right. Instead of, "Wow, these things are hard because I'm depressed." So, of course you deserve credit for doing them. Right?
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Do you think you could keep a list like this every day?
Abe: Yeah, I could. Maybe it would help if I would do this while I'm sitting on the couch at night.
Judith: Oh, that's a great idea.
Abe: Because that's when I have trouble.
Judith: Yeah, okay. So, "Keep list. Do at night."

[Dr. Beck anticipates Abe may forget some accomplishments if he waits until evening to record them, and offers a solution.]

Judith: Now, the only problem with only doing it at night is that, if you're like most people, you're likely to forget 90 percent of what you actually did.
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: I see you're wearing the rubber band.
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Right. Did that work to have you ask yourself what was going through your mind?
Abe: Yeah. That's how I realized that the evenings were difficult because I was, I was sitting there and having a hard time. Normally, I'd just go get a beer and not think about it. But because of this, I thought about it.
Judith: Terrific.
Abe: Then I knew what the thoughts were.

[Dr. Beck suggests using the rubber band as a reminder to note accomplishments.]

Judith: I wonder if you could use the rubber band to remind you not only to look for your depressing thoughts, which might or might not be true, but to also ask yourself, "What have I done in the last hour, or two hours, or something like that, that I deserve credit for?"
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: So, using the rubber band as a reminder.

[Dr. Beck reviews Abe¡¯s Action Plan, ensuring tasks feel manageable and adding specific, realistic goals.]

Judith: So, let me go through, if this is okay, the Action Plan that we have so far, and then let's cross some things off, or make some things easier. Okay?
Abe: Okay.
Judith: All right. So, when you do anything that's even a little bit difficult, you're going to give yourself credit.
Abe: Okay.
Judith: And you're going to write it on a piece of paper. You've already started here.
Abe: I've got my rubber band as a reminder to do that.
Judith: Yes. [writing] I'm going to put down rubber band. Right. And we wrote down that the reason to do this is that it will build your confidence.
Abe: Yeah. Yeah.

[They finalize the Action Plan and add items aimed at building Abe¡¯s confidence and mood.]

Judith: This is something you're going to do at night, but you're going to keep the rubber band, and at least try to keep track of these things during the day also.
Abe: Yeah.
Judith: Okay. "Get out of the house four to six times." How does that sound?
Abe: Yeah. I can do that.
Judith: Okay. How much do you agree with this idea? "I can do things I thought I couldn't do." How true do you think that is?
Abe: Well, little things anyway, that's true.
Judith: Mm-hmm [nods ¡°yes¡±]. It's true. Good.
Abe: I mean, I've already done that, a little bit.
Judith: So, I'm writing "true" next to that. "When I do them, I feel good about them."
Abe: Yeah. I agree with that.
Judith: That's true. "Maybe this means there are things I can do to take control."
Abe: I believe that 50 percent.
Judith: Okay. Maybe we'll come back to that if we have time.

[Dr. Beck continues with the Action Plan, focusing on reinforcing positive behaviors and thoughts.]

Case 7: 
Transcripts of Carl Rogers' Therapy Sessions Edited by Barbara T. Brodley and Germain Lietaer Volume 12
Year Page Gloria Filmed Interview 1965 2
Sylvia 4th Interview (Filmed) 1975 21 Commentary interspersed throughout
Sylvia 5th Interview (Filmed) 1975 39 Commentary interspersed throughout
Kathy Filmed Interview 1975 53 Commentary 67
Dione 1st Filmed Interview 1977 68 Commentary interspersed throughout
Dione 2nd Filmed Interview 1977 1977 85
  Final Comments
109
   These transcripts are available for purposes of research, study and teaching. They may not be sold.
Throughout these interviews the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 1

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 [Source: Shostrom, E. L. (1965). Three approaches to psychotherapy (Part I)[Film]. Orange, CA: Psychological Films.]
GLORIA
DR. CARL ROGERS PART I -- DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM [Before the Interview]
"From my own years of therapeutic experience, I have come to feel that if I can create the proper climate, the proper, relationship, the proper conditions, a process of therapeutic movement will almost inevitably occur in my client. You may ask, 'What is this climate? What are these conditions? Will they exist in the interview with the woman I am about to talk with, whom I have never seen before?' Let me try to describe very briefly what these conditions are as I see them.
First of all, one question is, can I be real in the relationship? This has come to have an increasing amount of importance to me over the years. I feel that genuineness is another way of describing the quality I would like to have. I like the term 'congruent', by which. I mean that what I am experiencing inside is present in my awareness and comes out through my communication. In a sense, when I have this quality, I am all in one piece in the relationship. There is another word that describes it for me. I feel that in the relationship, I would like to have a 'transparency.' I would be quite willing for my client to see all the way through me, that there would be nothing hidden. And when lam real in
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 2

this fashion that I'm trying to describe, then know that my own feelings will often bubble up into awareness and be expressed, but be expressed in ways that won't impose themselves on my client.
Then the second question I would have is, will I find myself prizing this person, caring for this person? I certainly don't want to pretend a if I dislike my client persistently, I feel it is better, that I should express it. But I know that the process of therapy is much more likely to occur and constructive change is much more likely, if I feel a real spontaneous prizing of this individual with whom I'm working, a prizing of this person as a separate individual. You can call that quality acceptance, you can call it caring, you can call it a non-possessive love if you wish. I think any of those terms tend to describe it. I know that the relationship will prove more constructive if it's present.
Then the third quality, will I be able to understand the inner world of this individual from the inside? Will I be able to see it through her eyes? Will I be able to be sufficiently sensitive to move around inside the world of her feelings so that I know what it feels like to be her so that I can sense not only the surface meanings, but some of the meanings that lie somewhat underneath the surface. I know that if I can let myself sensitively and accurately enter into her world of experience, then change and therapeutic movement are much more likely.
Well, suppose I am fortunate and that I do experience some of these attitudes in the relationship, what then? Well, then a variety of things are likely to happen. Both from my clinical experience and from our research investigations we find that if attitudes of the sorts that I have described are present, then quite a number of things will happen. She'll explore some of her feelings and attitudes more deeply. She is likely to discover some
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 3

hidden aspects of herself that she wasn't aware of previously. Feeling herself prized by me, it is quite possible she'll come to prize herself more. Feeling that some of her meanings are understood by me, then she can more readily perhaps listen to herself, listen to what is going on within her own experience, listen to some of the meanings she hasn't been able to catch before. And perhaps if she senses realness in me, she'll be able to be a little more real within herself. I suspect there will be a change in the manner of her expression, at least this has been my experience in other instances. From being rather remote from her experiencing, remote from
what is going on within her, it's possible that she'll move toward more immediacy of experiencing, that she will be able to sense and explore what is going on in her in the immediate moment. From being disapproving of herself, it is quite possible she'll move toward a greater degree of acceptance of herself. From somewhat of a fear of relating, she may move toward being able to relate more directly and to encounter me more directly. From construing life in somewhat rigid black and white patterns,' she may move toward more tentative ways of construing her experience and of seeing meanings in it. From a locus of evaluation which is outside of herself, it is quite possible she will move toward recognizing a greater capacity within herself for making judgments and drawing conclusions. So those are some of the changes that we have tended to find and I think that they are all of them changes that are characteristic of the process of therapy or of therapeutic movement. If I have any success in creating the kind of conditions that I described initially, then we may be able to see some of these changes in this client even though I know in advance that our contact is going to be very brief.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 4

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 Note: Gestures were transcribed by Barbara T. Brodley.
GLORIA
[Source: Shostrom, E. L. (1965). Three approaches to psychotherapy [Film]. Orange, CA: Psychological Films.]
THERAPIST: DR. CARL ROGERS
T1 (Rogers stands as Gloria enters.) Good morning. (C: Hello, Dr. Rogers) I'm Dr. Rogers, you must be Gloria. (They shake hands and sit down.)
C2 Yes, I am.
T2 Won't you have a chair? Now then, we have half an hour together, and I really don't know what we will be able to make of it but uh I hope we can make something of it. I'd be glad to know whatever concerns you. (T: Sitting forward, C: Sitting back, legs crossed, right arm over the back of the chair)
C3 Well, right now I'm nervous (T: Mhm) but I feel more comfortable the way you are talking in a low voice and I don't feel like you'll be so harsh on me. But, ah ...
T3 I hear the tremor in your voice so I know you are... (C: Smiles)
C4 Uh, well, the main thing I um, want to talk to you about is uh, I'm just newly divorced and uh I had gone in therapy before and I felt comfortable when I left, and all of a sudden now the biggest change is adjusting to my single life. (T: Mhm, mhm) And uh one of the things that bothers me the most is especially men, and having men to the house and how it affects the children (T: Mhm, Mhm) and- Uh, the biggest thing I want - the thing that keeps coming to my mind I want to tell you about is that I have a daughter, nine, who at one time I felt had a lot of emotional problems. I wish I could stop shaking (T and C: laugh). And uh, I'm real conscious of things affecting her. I don't want her to get upset, I don't want to shock her. I want so bad to- for her to accept me. And we're real open with each other especially about sex. And the other day she saw a girl that was single but pregnant and she asked me all about "can girls get pregnant if they are single?" And the conversation was fine and I wasn¡¯t un- at ease at all with her until she asked me if I had ever made love to a man since I left her daddy and I lied to her. And ever since that, it keeps
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 5

coming up to my mind because I feel so guilty lying to her because I never lie and I want her to trust me. And I want- I almost want an answer from you. I want you to tell me if it would affect her wrong if I told her the truth, or what. (T:Mhm)
T4 And it's this concern about her and the fact that you really aren't - that this open relationship that has existed between you, now you feel it's kind of vanished?
C5 Yes. I feel like I have to be on guard about that (T: Mhm) because I remember when I was a little girl, when I first found out my mother and father made love, that was dirty and terrible, and I didn't- I didn¡¯t like her any more for awhile. And I don't want to lie to Pammy either and I don't know...
T5 I sure wish I could give you the answer as to what you should tell her. (Smiles.) C6 I was afraid you were going to say that (Laughs).
T6 Because what you really want is an answer.
C7 I want to especially know if it would affect her if I was completely honest and open with her or if it would affect her because I lied. I feel like it is bound to make a strain because I lied to her. [Words lost]
T7 Mhm. You feel she'll suspect that, or she'll know something is not quite right?
C8 I feel that in time she will distrust me, yes (T: Mhm, mhm). And also I thought well, gee, what about when she gets a little older and she finds herself in touchy situations. She probably wouldn't want to admit it to me because she thinks I'm so good and so sweet. (Points to herself.) And yet I'm afraid she could think I'm really a- a devil. And I want so bad for her to accept me. And I don't know how much a nine-year-old can take.
T8 And really both alternatives concern you. That she may think you're too good or better than you really are.
C9 Yes.
T9 And she may think you are worse than you are.
C10 Not worse than I am. (Smiles) I don't know if she can accept me the way I am. I think I paint a picture that I'm all sweet and motherly. And -- I'm a little ashamed of my shady side too. (T:Mhm, mhm)
T10 I see. It really cuts a little deeper. If she really knew you, would she, could she accept you?
C11 This is what I don't know. Yeah. I don't want her to turn away from me. (T: That Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 6

relationship-) And I don't even know how I feel about it because there are times when I feel so guilty like when I have a man over, I even try to make a special set-up so that if I were ever alone with him, the children would never catch me in that sort of thing. Because I'm real leery about it (T: Mhm). And yet I also know that I have these desires.
T11 And so it¡¯s quite clear it isn't only her problem or the relationship with her, it's in you as well.
C12 And my guilt. Yeah. Yeah. (T: Oh) I feel guilty so often. (Moistens lips.)
T12 "What- What can I accept myself as doing?" And uh (C: Yes, Yes) you realize that you set up sort of subterfuges, so as to make sure that you're not caught or something, you realize that you are acting from guilt, is that it?
C13 Yes (T: Mhm, mhm) and I don't like the ... I would like to feel comfortable with whatever I do. If I choose not to tell Pammy the truth, to feel comfortable that she can handle it, (T: Mhm, Mhm, Mhm) and I don't. I want to be honest, and yet I feel there are some areas that I don't even accept (T: Mhm, Mhm) .
T13 And if you can't accept them in yourself, how could you possibly be comfortable in telling them to her?
C14 Right.
T14 Mhm. Mhm. And yet, as you say, you do have these desires and you do have your feelings, but- but you don't feel good about them.
C15 Right. (T: Nods and smiles.) (Pause) And I, I, I have a feeling that you are just going to sit there and let me stew in it (laughs) and I- I want more. I want you to help me get rid of my guilt feeling. If I can get rid of my guilt feeling about lying or going to bed with a single man, any of that, just so I can feel more comfortable.
T15 Mhm. And I guess I'd like to say, "No, I don't want to let you stew in your feelings," but on the other hand, I, I also feel that this is the kind of very private thing that I couldn't possibly answer for you. But I sure as anything will try to help you work toward your own answer. I don't know whether that makes any sense to you, but I mean it.
C16 Well, I appreciate you saying that. (Takes her arm off back of chair, now uses both hands to gesture.) You sound like you mean it. But I don't know where to go. (T: Mhm, Mhm, Mhm) I don't begin to know where to go. I thought that I had pretty well worked over most of my guilt, and now that this is coming up I'm disappointed in myself. (T: Mhm, Mhm) I really am. I want- I like it when I feel that no matter what I do, even if it's against my own morals or my upbringing, that I can still feel good about me. And now I don't. Like uh, there's a girl at work who sort of mothers
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 7

me and she just- she- I think she thinks I'm all sweet, and I sure don't want to show my more ornery devilish side with her. I want to be sweet and it's so hard for me to - this all seems so new again (T: Mhm) and it's so disappointing.
T16 Yeah, I get the disappointment - that here, a lot of these things you¡¯d thought you'd worked through, and now the guilts and the feeling that only a part of you is acceptable to anybody else.
C17 Yes.
T17 That keeps coming out. (Pause) (C: Strains eyebrows.) I guess I do catch the real deep puzzlement that you feel as to "What the hell shall I do? What can I do?"
C18 Yes, and do you know what I can find, doctor, (Touches forehead.) is that everything I start to do that I st- impulsive, seems natural to tell Pammy, or- or to go out on a date or something, I¡¯m comfortable until I think how I was affected as a child and the minute that comes up, then I'm all haywire. (T: Mhm) Like uh, I want to be a good mother so bad, and I feel like I am a good mother, (T: Mhm) but then there's those little exceptions. Like my guilts with working. I want to work and it's so fun having extra money. I like to work nights. The minute I think I'm not being real good to the children or giving them enough time, then I start feeling guilty again. Then, that¡¯s when I- it¡¯s uh- what do they call it? (Looks away briefly.) A double bind. That's just what it feels like. I want to do this and it feels right, but after all I'm not being a good mother and I want to be both. I am becoming more and more aware of what a perfectionist I am. That is what it seems I want to be so perfect. Either I want to become perfect in my standards, or not have that need any more.
T18 Or, I guess I hear it a little differently - that uh- what you want is to seem perfect, but it means it¡¯s- a great- a matter of great importance to you to be a good mother and you want to seem to be a good mother, even if some of your actual feelings differ from that. (Points to C.) Is that catching it or not?
C19 Gee, I don't feel like I am saying that. (T: Oh, okay) No, that isn't what I feel, really. I want to approve of me always, but my actions won't let me. I want to approve of me. (Pause) I ¨C I think- (Strains face.)
T19 I realize ... you -- alright, but let me -- I¡¯d like to understand it. You sound as though your actions were kind of outside of you. You want to approve of you, but what you do somehow won't let you approve of yourself.
C20 Right. (Pause) Like I feel that I can't approve of myself regarding, for example (Smiles.), my sex life. (T: Mhm, Mhm) This is the big thing. If I really fell in love with a man and I respected him and I adored him, I don't think I would feel so guilty going to bed with him and I don't think I would have to make up any excuses to the children because they could see my natural caring for him. (T: Mhm, Okay) But
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 8

when I have the physical desires and I'll say, "Oh well, why not," and I want to anyway, but I feel guilty afterwards. I hate facing the kids, I don't like looking at myself, and I rarely enjoy it. And this is what I mean. If the circumstances would be different, I don't think I'd feel so guilty because I'd feel right about it. (Gestures more profoundly.)
T20 Yeah, I- I guess I hear you saying, "If what I was doing, when I went to bed with a man, was really genuine and full of love and respect and so on, I wouldn't feel guilty in relation to Pam. I wouldn¡¯t uh, I, I really would be comfortable about the situation."
C21 That's how I feel, yeah. (Smiles.) And I know that sounds like I want a perfect situation, but that is how I feel. And in the meantime, I can't stop these desires. I tried that also. I¡¯ve tried saying, "O.K., I don't like myself when I do that so I won't do it any more." But then I resent the children. I think, why should they stop me from doing what I want, and it is really not that bad.
T21 But I guess I heard you saying too, that it isn't only the children, but you don't like it as well when it isn't really ...
C22 Right. I'm sure that - I know that's it, probably even more so than I'm aware of. But I only notice it so much when I pick it up in the children. Then I can also notice it in myself. (Touches her face.)
T22 And somehow, sometimes, you kind of uh, feel like blaming them for the feelings you have. I mean, why should they cut you out from a normal sex life, huh?
C23 Well, a sex life, I could say, not normal because there is something about me that says that's not very healthy ¨C to uh just go into sex because you feel physically attracted or something, or a physical need. So, something about it tells me that that's not quite right anyway. (Still touching her face.)
T23 Mhm. (Pause) But you feel, really, that at times you¡¯re acting in ways that are not in accord with your own inner standards.
C24 Right. Right.
T24 But then you were also saying, a minute ago, that you feel you can't help that uh- either.
C25 I wish I could. That's it, and I can't - now I feel like I- I can't control myself as well as I could have before. For a specific reason now, I can't. I just let go and I have- there¡¯s too many things I do wrong that I have to feel guilty for, and I sure don't like that. I want you very much to give me a direct answer, and I'm going to ask it, and I don't expect a direct answer, (Smiles.) but I want to know. Do you feel that - to me the most important thing is to be open and honest and if I can be
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 9

open and honest with my children, do you feel that it could harm them? If for example, I could say to Pammy, "I was- I felt bad lying to you, Pammy, and I want to tell you the truth now," and if I tell her the truth and she¡¯s shocked at me and she¡¯s upset, that that could bother her more? I was- I want to get rid of my guilts and that will help me, but I don't want to put ¡®em on her. (Points away from herself.)
T25 That's right.
C26 Do you feel that that could hurt her?
T26 That¡¯s a real concern. I guess uh - I am sure this will sound evasive to you, but it seems to me that perhaps the person you are not being uh fully honest with is you? (C: Sure) Because I was very much struck by the fact that you were saying, "If I feel all right about what I have done, whether it's going to bed with a man or what, if I really feel all right about it, then I do not have any concern about what I would tell Pam or my relationship with her." (Shakes head.)
C27 Right. All right. Now I hear what you are sayin¡¯. (Sighs) (Shifts back and forth in chair.) Then all right, then I want to work on (T: It¡¯s kind of tough, huh?) -- I wanna work on accepting me, then. I want to work on feeling all right about it. But that makes sense. That that will come natural and then I won't have to worry about Pammy. (T: Mhm.) But when things do seem so wrong for me and I have an impulse to do them, how can I accept that?
T27 What you'd like to do is to feel more accepting toward yourself when you do things that you feel are wrong. Is that right?
C28 Right. And I feel like, I feel like...
T28 (Smiling) It sounds like a tough assignment.
C29 Yeah, I feel like you are going to say, "Now why do you think they¡¯re wrong?" and uh, I have mixed feelings there too. (T: Mhm) Through therapy I will say, "Now look, I know this is natural. Women feel it - sure, we don't talk about it lots socially but all women feel it and it's very natural." I have had sex for the last 11 years and I¡¯m- of course going to want it, but I still think it is wrong unless you¡¯re really, truly in love with a man, and my body doesn't seem to agree. And so I don't know how to accept it.
T29 It sounds like a triangle to me, isn't it? You feel that I, or therapists in general, or other people say, "It is all right, it is all right, it¡¯s natural enough, go ahead." Um, and I guess you feel your body sort of lines up on that side of the picture. (Points to C. ) But something in you says, "But I don't like it that way, not unless it¡¯s really right."
C30 Right. (Long Pause) (Sighs, then speaks in a slower, somber way.) Well, I have a Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 10

hopeless feeling. (T: Mhm) I mean, these are all the things that I sort of feel myself, and I feel uh - O.K., now what?
T30 Mhm. You feel this is the conflict and it's just insoluble, and therefore it is hopeless, and here you look to me and I don't seem to give you any help and that uh-
C31 Right. I uh- I really know you can't answer for me, and I have to figure it out myself, but I want you to guide me or show me where to start or - so it won't look so hopeless. I know I can keep living with this conflict and I know eventually things would work out, but I'd like feeling more comfortable with the way I live ¨C (T: Mhm, mhm.) and I'm not.
T31 One thing I might ask, what is it you wish I would say to you?
C32 I wish you would say to me (Smiles): to be honest and take the risk that Pammy¡¯s going to accept me. And I also have a feeling if I could really risk it with Pammy, of all people, that I'd be able to say, "Here's this little kid that can accept me, and I'm really not that bad." If she really knows what a demon I am and still loves me and accepts me, it seems like it would help me to accept me more - like it's really not that bad. (T: Mhm) I want you to say to go ahead and be honest, but I don't want the responsibility that it would upset her. (T: I see.) That is where I don't want to take responsibility.
T32 So you know, yeah - You know very well what you'd like to do in the relationship. You would like to be yourself and you'd like to have her know that you're not perfect and do things that maybe even she wouldn't approve of, and that you disapprove of to some degree yourself, but that uh- somehow she would love you and accept you as an imperfect person.
C33 Yes. Like I wonder if my mother had been more open with me, maybe I wouldn't have had such a narrow attitude about sex. If I would have thought that she could be, you know, pretty sexy and ornery, and devilish too, that I wouldn't look at her as being such a sweet mother, that she could also be the other side. But she didn't talk about that. (Shakes her head.) (T: Mhm) Maybe that's where I got my picture. I don't know, but I want Pammy to see me as a full woman, but also accept me.
T33 You don't sound so uncertain.
C34 I don't? (Tilts head and smiles.) What do you mean?
T34 What I mean is you have been sitting there telling me just what you would like to do in that relationship with Pam.
C35 (Appears confused.) I would, but I don't want to quite take the risk of doing it (T: I can understand) unless an authority tells me that ...
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 11

T35 (Eyes moistening, hands clasped.) It¡¯s, I guess one thing that I feel very keenly is that it's an awful risky thing to live. (Pause) (Hands unclasp.) You'd be taking a chance on your relationship with her and taking a chance on letting her know who you are, really.
C36 (Pause) Yeah. But then if I don't take the chance, if I feel loved and accepted by her, I'll never feel good about it anyway.
T36 Mhm. Mhm. If her love and acceptance of you is based on a false picture of you, what the hell is the good of that? Is that- is that what you are saying?
C37 Yeah, that¡¯s what I mean, yes. But I also feel there is a lot of responsibility with being a mother. With I don¡¯t- I don't want to feel like I have caused any big traumas in the children. I don't like all that responsibility. I think that's it. I don't like it, feeling it could be my fault.
T37 Mhm. I guess that's what I meant when I said, "Life is risky." It¡¯s uh- to take the responsibility for being the person you would like to be with her is a hell of a responsibility.
C38 It is.
T38 A very frightening one.
C39 And you know, I- I look at it two ways. I like to see myself as being so honest with the kids, and really being proud of myself so that no matter what I told them or no matter how bad they think I was, I was honest (points at herself) (T: Mhm) and down deep it¡¯s gonna be a much more wholesome relationship, and yet you know, I get jealous of like when they are with their daddy. I feel he¡¯s more flip, he¡¯s not quite as real, he¡¯s not quite as honest, but nevertheless, they see a sweet picture of their dad. You know, he is all goodness and light, and I am envious of that too. I want them to see me just as sweet as they see him and yet I know he is not quite as real with them. So it seems like I've got to swap the one for the other, and I know this is really what I want the most, but uh, I miss some of that glory.
T39 Yeah. You sort of feel, ¡°I want them to have just as nice a picture of me as they have of their dad, (C: I do. Right) and if his is a little phony, then maybe mine will have to be too.¡± I think that's putting it a little too strongly, but-
C40 But that¡¯s close. That is what I mean. So uh- But I know she can't have that neat a picture of me, if I were honest. (Big smile) (T: Laughs) Besides that, I do feel that I¡¯m a little more ornery than their dad anyway. So I'm likely to do more things that they¡¯d disapprove of.
T40 Sounds like you really find it quite hard to believe that they would really love you if they knew you?
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 12

C41 That's right. You know that's exactly it. Before therapy, I would have definitely chosen the other area. I¡¯m going to get respect from them no matter what - even if I have to lie.
T41 I see.
C42 But right now, I know that's not true (T: Mhm, mhm) and I'm not positive they'll truly accept me. Something tells me they will. I know they will, but I am not positive. I want reassurance. I keep wanting these things.
T42 And now you are kind of in a no-man's-land of probably shifting from one point of view toward them to another, but boy you'd sure like somebody to say, "That's right, you go ahead and do it." (Gestures to sides.)
C43 Yes. Yes. That's why I get encouraged when I read in a book from somebody I respect and admire, that this is the right thing no matter what - honesty will win out. Well then, that keeps giving me confidence. ¡°By gosh, I'm right.¡± But I ...
T43 It is so damned hard to really choose something on your own, isn't it?
C44 Which makes me feel rea- very immature. I don't like this in me. I wish I were grown up enough or mature enough to make my decisions and stick by them, but I need somebody to help me on - somebody to push me.
T44 So that you kind of reproach yourself for that, I guess. And feel, "Why, if I was anybody, or if I was grown up, I'd be mature enough to decide things like this for myself."
C45 Right. Right. And take more risks. I wish I¡¯d take more risks. I wish that I could just go ahead and be this and say, however the children grow up, I've done my best. I didn¡¯t have to constantly have this conflict. And I'd like, in later years, to say, "No matter what you asked me kids, at least I told you the truth. You may not have liked it, but it's been the truth." (Camera pans towards hands.) That, somehow, I can admire. (T: Mhm.) I- I disrespect people that lie. I hate it so, you see what a double bind I am in. I hate myself if I'm bad, but I also hate myself if I lie. So uh, it's accepting. I want to become more accepting.
T45 I guess, judging from your tone of voice, you sound as though you hate yourself more when you lie than you do in terms of things you disapprove of in behavior.
C46 I do. I do because this has really bothered me. This happened with Pammy about a month ago and it keeps coming to my mind. I don't know whether to go back and talk to her about it or wait. She may have even forgotten what she asked me, but uh ¨C it just-
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 13

T46 The point is, you haven't forgotten.
C47 I haven... No, I haven't. And I would like, at least, to be able to tell her that I remember lying and I am sorry I lied and it has been driving me bugs because I did. (Pause) I do- Now I feel like - now that's solved - and I didn't even solve a thing, but I feel relieved. (T: Mhm, Mhm.) I uh- I do feel like you have been saying to me ¨C you¡¯re not say- giving me advice, but I do feel like you are saying, "You really wanna- You know what pattern you want to follow Gloria, and go ahead and follow it." I sort of feel a backing up from you.
T47 I guess the way I sense it is uh, you've been telling me that you know what you want to do and yes, I do believe in backing up people in what they want to do. It¡¯s just a little different slant than the way it seems to you.
C48 Are you telling me...
T48 You see, one thing that concerns me is uh,.. It's no damn good you¡¯re doing something that you haven't really chosen to do. That¡¯s why I am trying to help you find out what your own inner choices are.
C49 But then there's also a conflict there because I am not really positive what I wanna do. The lying part, yes, but I am not positive what I wanna do when I go against myself. (T: Sure) Like when I bring a man to the house. I am not sure I want to do that. If I feel guilty afterward, I must not have really wanted to.
T49 And I am interested that you say - I'm not just sure which words you used - but you don¡¯t want- you don¡¯t like yourself or don't approve of it when you do something against yourself. (C: Hand to her face.)
C50 Yes. You know, this is so different. Now this kind of thing we are talking about now, it isn't just knowing whether you want to do something or not. If I want to go to work in the morning or if I don't want to go to work, that's easy. (Both hands palms up.) But when I find myself doing something I don't feel comfortable with, I automatically say, "If you¡¯re not comfortable Gloria, it¡¯s not right. Something¡¯s wrong." All right now. What I want to ask you is, how can I know which is the strongest? Because I do it, does that mean that¡¯s the strongest? And yet, if I disapproved, that's just part of the thing that¡¯s got to go along with it? You see, it sounds like you... (Points at self with both hands.) I'm picking up a contradiction. I¡¯m not under- I¡¯m not following.
T50 It sounds like you¡¯re feeling a contradiction in yourself too, although you- what I heard you saying in part is uh, the way you like it is when you feel really comfortable about what you are doing.
C51 Yes, and I have at times, when I¡¯ve made a decision. Now that seems right. (T: Mhm) That seems perfectly right - no conflict - but then there are times I do things
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 14

that I feel uncomfortable with. So that there is a conflict there. (T: Mhm) It's not the same at all. So, what I'm saying is, how do I really know when I am following my true feelings, if I have conflicts afterwards or guilt afterwards?
T51 I see. Because in the moment, it may seem like your true feelings.
C52 Yes. Like if I¡¯m starting to do it -- O.K.
T52 Mhm. Mhm. So that really is tough ah ... When if you feel comfortable in the moment about it, but then afterwards don't feel at all comfortable, which course of action was really the one you should have followed?
C53 You know, the most outstanding thing - I don't know if you are following me, when I say about this conflict - the one thing I know is I¡¯ve wanted, for example, to leave my husband for quite a few years. I never did it. I kept thinking how nice it would be, or how scary it would be, but I never did it. And all of a sudden when I did, it felt right. I didn't feel mean toward him. I just knew this was what I had to do. That's when I know I am following myself. I am following my feelings completely. I have no conflict there. Some unhappy things came from it (T: sure), but I still have no conflict. That, to me, is when I am following my feelings. And in everyday life the small little decisions, the small little things to do don't come out that clear at all. So many conflicts come with them. (T: Mhm, that¡¯s right) Is this natural? (Knits eyebrows.)
T53 Although you are saying ¨C uh, I expect it is ¨C but, but you¡¯re saying too that you know perfectly well the feeling within yourself that occurs when you are really doing something that's right for you.
C54 I do. I do. (Face relaxes.) And I miss that feeling other times. And it's right away a clue to me.
T54 Mhm. You can really listen to yourself sometimes and realize, "Oh no, this isn't the right feeling. This isn't ¨C this isn¡¯t the way I would feel if I was doing what I really wanted to do."
C55 But yet, many times I will go along and do it anyway. And say, "Oh well, I'm in the situation now, I'll just remember next time." I mentioned this word a lot in therapy and most therapists grin at me or giggle or something when I say "utopia," but when I do follow a feeling and I feel this good feeling inside of me, that's sort of utopia. That's what I mean. That's the way I like to feel whether it's a bad thing or a good thing. But I feel right about me. This is what I wanna...
T55 I, I sense that in those utopian moments, you really feel kind of whole. You feel all in one piece.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 15

C56 Yes. Yeah, it gives me a choked up feeling when you say that because I don't get that as often as I'd like. (Smiles.) I like that whole feeling. That's real precious to me. (Touches her face.)
T56 I expect none of us get it as often as we'd like, but I really do understand it. (Pause) (C: Tears come to her eyes.) Mhm, that really does touch you, doesn't it?
C57 Yeah, and you know what else I was just thinking? I ¨C I feel dumb saying it uh - that all of a sudden while I was talking to you I thought, "Gee, how nice I can talk to you and I want you to approve of me and I respect you, but I miss that my father couldn't talk to me like you are." (Touches her chin.) I mean, I'd like to say, "Gee, I'd like you for my father." (T: Mhm, Mhm, Mhm) I don't even know why that came to me. (Smiles)
T57 You look to me like a pretty nice daughter. (Pause) (C: Looks down.) But you really do miss the fact that you- you couldn't be open with your own dad.
C58 Yeah, I couldn't be open, but I, I wanna blame it on him. I think I¡¯m more open than he'd allow me. He would never listen to me talk like you are and not disapprove, not lower me down. I thought of this the other day. Why do I always have to be so perfect? I know why. He always wanted me to be perfect. I always had to be better (touches her lips) and uh... yeah, I miss that.
T58 You were just trying like hell to be the girl he wanted you to be. C59 Yet at the same time, rebelling.
T59 That's right. Sure. (Nods)
C60 (Gesturing with left hand from the side of her head.) Like I almost gloated writing him a letter the other day and telling him I am a waitress, which I expect him to disapprove of. I go out at nights and I almost gloated hitting him back - like, "Now how do you like me?" (T: Uh-huh, Uh-huh) And yet, I really want acceptance and love from him. I mean, I know he loves me.
T60 So you slap at him and say, "This is what I am, now see."
C61 Yeah. (T: But you- yeah) "You raised me, how do you like it?" But do you know what I want him to say? "I knew this was you all along, honey, and I really love you." (Wipes a tear with finger.)
T61 Oh, I see. You really feel badly that you think there is very little chance he will say that.
C62 No. He won't. He doesn't hear. (Her voice sad and resigned.) I went back home to him about two years ago, really wanting to let him know I loved him although I¡¯ve
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 16

been afraid of him. And he doesn't hear me. He just keeps saying things like, "Honey, you know I love you. You know I have always loved you." He doesn't hear. (Her eyes moisten.)
T62 That was... He¡¯s never really known you and loved you and this, somehow, is what brings the tears inside.
C63 I don't know what it is. You know, when I talk about it, it feels more flip. If I just sit still a minute, it feels like a great big hurt down there. That I uh, feel cheated. (Reaches for kleenex, wipes her eye.)
T63 Mhm. Mhm. It is much eas... It¡¯s much easier to uh be a little flip, because then you don't feel that big lump inside of hurt.
C64 Mhm. (Nodding) And again, that's a hopeless situation. I tried working on it, and uh, I feel it's something I have to accept. My father just isn't the type of man I'd really like. I'd like somebody more understanding and caring. He cares, but not in the way that we can cooperate or communicate.
T64 Mhm. You feel ¡°nope¡± that, "I am permanently cheated."
C65 Mhm. That is why I like substitutes. Like I like talking to you and I like men that I can respect. Doctors, and I keep sort of maybe underneath a feeling like we¡¯re real close, you know, and it¡¯s sort of like a substitute father.
T65 I don't feel that's pretending.
C66 Well, you are not really my father (laughs). (Raises her eyebrows.)
T66 No, I meant about the real close business.
C67 Well, see, I sort of feel that's pretending too, because I can't expect you to feel very close to me. You don't know me that well. (Fingering kleenex.)
T67 Well, all I can do is what I am feeling- that is I feel close to you in this moment. (Long Pause.)
C68 [The remainder is not on the film ¨C only on audio recording] Well, O.K., I'd just like more of it I guess.
T68 Do you feel as though that's a big need, that it would take a lot of caring and a lot of understanding to fill it up?
C69 Exactly. And I have been so busy trying to get rid of my neurosis. I'd like to have this one neurosis filled. I'd like to just find someone who is going to love me like a father. I even want this in boyfriends. I always want to get an older man that's
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 17

caring and more mature and not so flip.
T69 One of the things you really deeply want is to find a father whom you would love and respect and who would really like you as you are, and not to just like perfection.
C70 That's right. And it seems ironic that since I have been away from my husband, the only type of man I go out with are the kind I don't respect - are the young, flip, not caring, 'smart aleck' kind of guy. Not somebody that's really, you know, that I can respect. That seems like such a big thing.
T70 The phrase that comes to my mind - I don't know if it is appropriate or not - you're slapping your father in the face, aren't you?
C71 Oh? By wanting mature men?
T71 No. By going out with those who are quite unlike the ones you'd really want. C72 But I don't mean to. I don't understand why they keep coming around.
END of FILM and AUDIORECORDING
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 18

Rogers¡¯ Post-Session Commentary
In spite of feeling initially the artificiality of the situation, particularly the hot lights, I
very quickly became oblivious to the outside situation, and I think that Gloria did too. In many ways I'm glad that she kept pushing me for an answer to her very personal questions about her sex life and her relationship to her daughter. I say I'm glad of this because as the relationship developed, it became I think completely clear to her as well as to me that she was seeking something a good deal deeper than that. Incidentally, I'd like to pay my tribute to her deep honesty in being willing to talk about herself so freely.
Although every individual is entirely unique, and in this respect I was definitely unprepared for and sometimes surprised by the material she brought up - still, in another sense, this was very typical of my experiences in therapy. When I am able really to let myself enter into a relationship, and I feel that this was true in this instance, then I find myself not only being increasingly moved by being in touch with the inner world of my client, but I find myself bringing out my own inner experience, statements which seem to have no connection with what's going on, but which usually prove to be, or prove to have, a very significant relationship to what the client is experiencing. I felt there were one o two incidents of this kind in this brief interview.
I was genuinely moved, I probably showed it, by the fact that she told me near the end of the contact that, uh, she saw me as the father she would like to have. My reply was also a thoroughly spontaneous one that she seemed to me like a pretty nice daughter. I guess I feel that we're only playing with the real world of relationships when we talk about such an experience in terms of transference and counter-transference. I feel quite deeply about that. I want to say, yes, we can put this experience into some such highly intellectualized framework, but when we do
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Post-Session Commentary, page 19

that it completely misses the point of the very immediate "I-Thou" quality of the relationship at such moments. I felt that Gloria and I really encountered each other and that in some small but, I believe, lasting way, we were each of us enriched by the experience. I am saying these things almost immediately after the conclusion of the interview and as is characteristic of me, there are not more than one or two statements or incidents which I recall from the interview. I simply know that I was very much present in the relationship, that I lived it in the moment of its occurrence, and I realize that after a time I may begin to remember it too. But at the present time, I really have a very non-specific memory of the whole interview. I'll try to look at it, though, a little bit more from an intellectual rather than a strictly feeling point of view. Gloria showed what I have come to feel are characteristic elements of therapeutic movement. In the first part of the interview, she was talking about her feelings and they were past feelings.. She was talking about aspects of her behavior and of herself as if she didn't quite own them. She was looking outside herself for a center, or a locus of evaluation, some source of authority. She saw some of the things she was talking about in fairly black and white fashion. By the end of the interview, she was experiencing her feelings in the immediate moment, not only as evidenced by her tears, but by her ability to express very directly and with immediacy her feelings toward me. She was also much more aware of her ability to make her own judgments and choices. I guess, put in terms that have become somewhat commonplace, you could say that she moved from the "there and then" of her life to the "here and now" of elements that she was discovering in herself feelings which she was experiencing in the moment in her relationship with me. All in all, I feel good about the interview. I guess I feel good about myself in the interview and like Gloria, I feel very real regret that the relationship cannot continue.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Post-Session Commentary, page 20

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
In this interview the responses of the therapist (C) (Carl Rogers), and the client (S) (Sylvia) are numbered for easy reference.
 Carl Rogers 4th Interview with Sylvia1 - 1975
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (1975). Carl Rogers¡¯ 4th Interview with Sylvia [Film].]
After filming, comments by Sylvia and Rogers were inserted. The bracketed italicized dialogue indicates the voiced over comments.
[Carl Rogers: This is my fourth interview with Sylvia. A year previous, Sylvia had been a member of a workshop in which I offered to put on a demonstration interview. I asked for volunteers and she was the first one to volunteer. In front of that workshop audience, I held three interviews with Sylvia. Then a year, uh, intervened before this fourth interview. The interview will be, uh, shown as it was recorded, but with, uh, comments both from Sylvia and from myself, at points where we felt we wished to clarify what was going on, uh, or to, to, uh, make some comment about what was going on.]
Carl: Hi.
Sylvia: Hi Carl. (They both sit down, facing each other.)
C: Good to see ya.
S 1: I¡¯ve been looking forward to this moment.
C 1: Well, I¡¯m eager to know what¡¯s what with you.
S 2: (Looks down.) (Pause 8 seconds.) (Leans back.) Well, do you mean in terms of the
past year or right now?
1 This Sylvia, in session #4, is the same person as the client in the film ¡°The Struggle for Self-Acceptance¡± - session #5 with Sylvia.
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 21

C 2: Oh, right now, whatever your concerns are in your present life. (S: Mhm hm) I guess that¡¯s what I¡¯m interested in.
S 2: Well, um, (smiles) I come here with an agenda, (C: Okay.) like, of a particular thing I¡¯d like to discuss with you. (C: All right.) And, and I think that discussing it will be helpful in terms of my, of my life.
C 2: Uh-huh. Then that¡¯s what I¡¯d like you to discuss.
S 3: Well, I think I¡¯m doing very well in many ways, and I need to do some work,
(C: M-hm.) too. (C: M-hm.) And, uh, the most pressing thing with me is that I plan to go to work in the fall, (C: Nods.) full-time, (C: Nods.) and have the care of both of my sons. (C: Nods.) Without any support other than what I¡¯m earning. (4 second pause.) And I, and I, I don¡¯t feel very upset about it, but I believe that deep down in my body I¡¯m really afraid. (Smiles.)
C 3: Are you afraid of the responsibility or, or what aspect of it is most frightening? S 4: Well what, what seems most frightening as I think about it is coming home from
work very tired (C: M-hm.) and having, um, two little boys that need a lot. (C: M-
hm.) (Her voice quivers.)
C 4: Will you really be able to be a mother to them when they, (hands Sylvia tissue box.)
when you come home from work. Hmmm?
S 5: Well, I¡¯m sure I can do it (gets teary) because I, it¡¯s done every day. And, uh, the
women I know an... who are trying to do that are having a really hard time. (C: M- hm.) (3 seconds pause.) And I¡¯ve been thinking about talking about this problem now with you. I haven¡¯t really... I, I talk about in a heady way with my friends, and, uh, I haven¡¯t given myself any real support (C: M-hm.) with it. It¡¯s a real fear I
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 22

have, and it¡¯ll probably be really hard. (C: M-hm.)
[Carl: It¡¯s interesting that, uh, because she had saved up this problem to talk about that the moment she begins to talk about it she begins to, to, uh, get teary - that¡¯s why I reached for the, uh, Kleenex, which she didn¡¯t use. But, uh, it¡¯s evident that, uh, though she may have talked about it in a, in an intellectual fashion to her friends, uh, it really does have a lot of emotional import for her.]
[Sylvia: Well, I, I don¡¯t know if it¡¯s obvious to you but I started to cry when I said that and you know why, you know, I was feeling a lot of sadness.]
C 5: (Talking at the same time) And you haven¡¯t really had a chance to explore it in, in
depth; you¡¯ve talked about it more on a, on the surface level.
S 5: Well, the exploring I¡¯ve done is... (3 seconds pause) I decided for myself- well
simple, I¡¯ll look for other single working mothers (C: Nods.) with young children who are doing well. (C: M-hm.) And I¡¯ll talk to them and see what they do. (C: M- hm.) So I started asking, asking my friends, asking some people I know, ¡°Do you know of this kind of person?¡± Well after about a month, (quiet laugh) I didn¡¯t come up with one, (C: Is that right?) one single woman taking care of young children and working full-time who was doing very well (C: Nods.) and that scared me.
C 6: So the track record, the track record that the other people have, the other women have makes you really concerned about will you be able to do it?
S 7: Well that substantiates my concern.
C 8: Yeah. Yeah.
S 9: I¡¯ve had the concern. (C: Yeah. M-hm.) (Pause 8 seconds.) (C: M-hm.) I wish,
(smiles.) I keep wishing I could find some secrets to make it easier for myself. And Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 23

the only secrets I can come up with are working half-time (C: Nods.) and being really, like, no... (C: M-hm.) just barely, you know, paying rent and (C: M-hm.) food and so forth and so on. (C: Mhm.) But, I do know how to do that (pauses) and that may be what I decide to do.
C 9: It¡¯s one possible option at any rate. Mhm.
S 10: But it seems like a real limited lifestyle.
C 10: It is clear to me from the, from the tears that came up the first that, that, uh, this is
something you feel a lot of concern about, isn¡¯t it?
S 11: Oh, I feel I¡¯m two things (crying). All alone (C: Mhm.) and somewhat doomed to
fail.
[Carl: I think, at this part, she was feeling, um, uh, quite discouraged after following a very good plan. Some of the responses along here are almost mechanical, like, um, my saying that¡¯s another option. But then when I do pick up on the, uh, feeling that she had exhibited at the first, it, uh, brings up fresh all of the feeling that¡¯s, uh, stirred up around that. And, uh, I think my response shows that I¡¯m doing what I, what I customarily try to do. It is to live in the client¡¯s experience and to feel whatever she¡¯s feeling. This is the important thing to really go with the client into whatever feelings there are. And here I really go with her into her sadness. At times I, uh, feel almost as though I¡¯m speaking for the client. And to me that¡¯s, um, the relationship is good at those times. I feel as though, uh, I¡¯m in the client¡¯s world. I¡¯m saying things that she could be saying. And, uh, when she says, ¡°That¡¯s right¡± it shows I have been right where she¡¯s experiencing it.]
C 11: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.
S 12: And, uh, (clears throat) doomed to fail, not that I will die or (C: Mhm.) anything. I
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 24

think doomed to fail and to be there for my children (C: Mhm. Mhm.) in a positive, cheerful, (C: Mhm.) warm, loving way. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) And being a single parent, like I will be (C: Mhm.) their support system to a large extent. (C: Mhm.) And it scares me to think of their main support as being exhausted (C: Mhm.) and irritated (C: Mhm.) and (C: Mhm.) ... (3 seconds pause.)
C 13: You just feel, ¡°I may not be able to make it. I may be doomed (Sylvia smiles and nods.) to failure by the very circumstances.¡±
S 14: Right. (Nods.) (C: Mhm.) (10 second pause.) And talking about it this way I feel two ways: Like, ¡°Oh c¡¯mon Sylvia. Everybody else is doing it too.¡± And on the other hand, like, you¡¯re willing to sit here and talk (laughs) about it with me (C: Mhm.) and I appreciate that. (Voice breaks.)
C 14: Mhm. Mhm. But you don¡¯t have to just tell yourself, ¡°Oh, buck up, you can do it.¡± It¡¯s, it gives you a good chance to really...
S 15: (Takes Kleenex and wipes eyes.) Right. Well, I do do that, ¡°Buck up, you can do it.¡± I¡¯ll do that plenty. But I don¡¯t get much opportunity to, (C: Nods.) to be sad with somebody about it. (C: Yeah.) How hard it (C: Yeah.) seems. (Crying.)
C 15: Yeah. Yeah. That¡¯s the thing isn¡¯t it? That to be all alone, with no support from anybody, it sounds like...
S 16: Well, I mean (C: I mean...) there are people that (C: Yeah, I know but...) care about me. (C: But...) There¡¯s, like, no financial (C: Yeah.) support. (C: Mhm.) And it¡¯s not like I¡¯ll have my mother next door, (C: Mhm.) or something like that.
C 16: You¡¯ll be alone with a heavy burden and it is a sad prospect really.
S 17: (Nods head.) (Pause 3 seconds.) It feels sad. (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) And I get...
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 25

when I, (pauses) I depress myself by thinking, ¡°Well, oh, sure I can give up my children.¡± And I think, ¡°Well, I won¡¯t do that.¡± Um, I¡¯m seeing it as a black or white thing (C: Mhm.) and I know that¡¯s not reality.
C 17: (Nods.) But it feels like reality. That either you¡¯d have to give up your children or, or else (S: Mhm.) make a go of it.
S 18: But then I also feel suspicious of myself. Like, ¡°Well, Sylvia, you¡¯re used to so much of getting your needs met.¡± Like, going out at night sometimes, (C: Mhm.) um, having friends, (C: Mhm.) and, and having a social life and not being overtired. (C: Mhm.) And then I see myself as pampered. (C: Nods and smiles.) And, uh, if I just wasn¡¯t so pampered, (laughs) things would be a lot better.
C 18: That¡¯s when you kind of scold yourself, (: Uh-huh.) really. Mhm. Mhm. Mhm. (pause 7 seconds) So that you really feel you¡¯re gonna be hemmed in by that. I mean, your life is gonna be constricted (S: Mhm.) a good deal. A lot of the things you¡¯ve been used to you just won¡¯t have.
S 19: And want for myself.
C 19: And want for yourself. (S: Nods.) Uh-huh.
S 20: Yeah, that¡¯s right.
C 20: So really it does look like a very tough period, doesn¡¯t it?
S 21: Yep. It does. (pause 13 seconds) But, I like being able to be sad and complain about
how terrible I¡¯m afraid it¡¯s going to be then I can... like now I¡¯m feeling like, and
I¡¯m excited too, you know, about facing it.
C 21: Sort of a new phase of your life? Is it... it has excitement as well as dread in it, I
guess.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 26

S 21: (Nods.) Yeah about seeing what it will be like, (C: Mhm.) in fact. (C: Mhm.) (Sighs).
[Sylvia: I smiled (C: Mhm .) a little bit there and I think that I was feeling like a relief of tension or, um, I don¡¯t know how to describe it but a relief of, of after crying and feeling sad and then having that feeling pass (C: Mhm. to something else.]
[Carl: It¡¯s, uh, it¡¯s very often true that if, uh, I go with a client into sad or desperate or negative feelings that (clears throat) then that satisfies that aspect of their experience and then they can move on to something else. So that it¡¯s very common to have positive feelings, uh, follow, uh, very, uh, negative ones. Also I might just comment here that, uh, these pauses seemed very brief to me, uh, but to some therapists, to some counselors, uh, a pause is very hard to bear. I don¡¯t find pauses hard to bear. This was her silence and I was willing to let her have it and to speak up when she was ready. During those pauses, I¡¯m very quiet inside. Um, I really am quite content to wait. Uh, sometimes I am reviewing what she has been experiencing. Um, but I¡¯m not, uh, I¡¯m not trying to look ahead, and I¡¯m not thinking about the process. I¡¯m just trying to feel it as it might be going on in her.]
C 21: It will be a new adventure but it¡¯s one that, uh, you feel different ways about. S 22: Mhm. Yeah. So that¡¯s, that¡¯s what I think about the most, in terms of a problem
area. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) Like, the (smiles) way I started crying it seemed like I just couldn¡¯t wait to get here and cry about it. (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) It was a little dramatic that way.
C 22: ¡®Cos it is...well, it is, it is a real sad prospect. And one, I guess, that you don¡¯t let out too much to other people, the sad side of it.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 27

S 23: Right, I don¡¯t do that (C: Nods.) very well. I, (C: Mhm.) I am busy being strong (C: Mhm.) unconsciously. Or I¡¯m also busy being depressed. (C: Mhm.) (Sylvia smiles) I¡¯ve learned well. I believe being sad and scared are more dealing with (C: Mhm. Mmm.) the problem.
C 23: Mhm. Yeah being, being frightened of what you¡¯re taking on and sad of what you¡¯re losing for yourself. (S: Nods.) Those are two very real (S: Hmm.) feelings. S 24: And I, (pauses) I also think that part of my fear and excitement is that I¡¯ll be doing
something different. Like, I¡¯ve never worked (C: Nods.) in, in my profession (C: Mhm. Mhm.) and been like a confident, (C: Mhm.) single woman with young children (C: Mhm.) who are doing well. (C: Mhm.) And it¡¯s like, um, that¡¯s what I want for myself. (C: Mhm.) (Sylvia laughs.)
C 24: It¡¯s a goal you¡¯ve been working toward. (S: Nods.) Mhm. (3 seconds pause.) I wonder sort of how do your children feel about this?
[Carl: Here I simply, um, followed my impulse because I found myself thinking about her children, I raised that question with her. Uh, whether that was a good move or not from a counseling point of view is, uh, hard to say until we see what happens next. You might think in viewing this that, uh, I had, uh, thought about what was going on and decided, ¡°Here¡¯s a, uh, here¡¯s a piece that¡¯s missing. Here¡¯s something she hasn¡¯t talked about.¡± Actually that¡¯s not the process that goes on in me. Uh, I try to be open to whatever wells up in me and to say that, to, to act more, uh, from my inner feelings then from, from thinking about the process.]
S 25: Well, my youngest son wants me to go work (C: Nods.) so that we can have more (C: Mhm.) money and so that he can have more spending money. And, uh, my
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 28

oldest son has not, at this time, agreed to live with me yet. (C: Mmm.) But I¡¯m preparing (C: Mhm.) with the hopes that he will at that time. (C: Mhm.) He is living with... he will be living with me the rest of the summer.
C 25: Mhm. So that¡¯s another new part of the...
S 26: And my oldest son and I have a very strained relationship. He hasn¡¯t been living
with me the last two years. And so that¡¯s gonna be another difficult part of what I¡¯m talking about (C: Mhm.) is, um, at the same time needing and wanting to improve my relationship with Senate (C: Mhm.) and hoping there¡¯ll be money for counseling. I¡¯m hoping (C: Mhm.) that we can do work with a third party or in (C: Mhm.) a, uh, family group of some sort (C: Mhm.) because I believe that we¡¯ll need help. (C: Mhm.) And, uh, so that¡¯s, that, that part of the fall or the coming year scares me too about feeling so alienated from Senate.
C 26: ¡°Will he, will he really accept me as a mother?¡±
[Sylvia: Well, he says, ¡°Will he really accept as a mother¡± to me that is showing me he is listening to what I¡¯m saying. (C: Mhm.) And that even, um, (pauses) I don¡¯t know if it was or not at that time but it could be very easily have been a, a helper to me to help me focus with what I was, um, wrestling with in terms of understanding or clarifying for myself what I was thinking about it.]
S 27: (Phone rings) As his mother, (C: Yeah.) as someone who loves him (C: Mhm.) and
cares about him.
C 27: So that¡¯s a concern to ya, too.
S 28: (Nods.) (3 seconds pause.) Mhm. And can we get along? Can we live together? We
haven¡¯t lived together, and he¡¯s lived in a very different lifestyle.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 29

C 28: ¡°Can we really form a relationship of the kind that both of us would like?¡±
S 29: Pardon?
C 29: Your asking yourself, ¡°Can we really form a relationship that both of us will like?¡± S 30: (Nods.) Mhm. Yeah, and be happy and, (C: Mhm.) yeah... (8 seconds pause.)
(Smiles.) That¡¯s an important... I hadn¡¯t thought of that on my own, but you mentioning my children (C: Mhm.) brings up the part about Senate, which is a very important part of what I think about. (C: Mhm.) And I¡¯m happy I¡¯ll have him with us (C: Nods.) during the summer and we¡¯ll be able to have time.
C 30: You can get a start on that. Mhm.
S 31: Mhm. Yeah. (C: Mhm.) When I¡¯m not working, (smiles and nods) for example.
(Pause 24 seconds.) Well, I felt awfully rigid about this upcoming filming. (C:
Nods.) I felt it in my body a lot. And I feel, I felt more relaxed since we started. C 31: Mhm. Mhm. (Pause 4 seconds.) It¡¯s a really difficult thing.
S 32: Mhm. (Pauses.) Right, and just the same it¡¯s exciting (C: Mhm.) to come (C:
Mhm.) on this trip and to see you again (C: Mhm.) and it¡¯s also frightening a lot. (C: Mhm.) Ya know, who¡¯s gonna see it? And what are they gonna think? (C: Mhm.) And what¡¯s it gonna look like? (C: Mhm.) Am I, am I being hard on myself or am I being good to myself? I don¡¯t know - to put myself in this position (C: Yeah.) is what I mean.
C 32: Yeah. (Pause.) You have quite a little of conflict about, ¡°Should I really be doing this? Who, who will see it? (S: Nods.) What will they say? Am I wise?¡±
S 33: Uh-huh. What¡¯s it gonna be? What¡¯s the finished project, gonna be? (C: Mhm.)
(Clears throat.) Will I ever see it? (C: Mhm.) (Both smile.) (10 second pause.) Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 30

[Sylvia: To put myself in a position, um, where I¡¯ll be... I was disclosing very private things about myself where other people, I have no idea who all, may be viewing this and making their own judgments, and, um, exposing myself, (clears throat) that seems hard and, uh, being good to myself, being willing to go through the hardness for the opportunity of learning and experience of Carl. That, I think, is being very good for myself.]
[Carl: Sylvia has been quite aware of the filming but has had what I believe is a very good attitude toward it. Uh, that she hopes that by being as natural as she can in the interviews, she¡¯ll be making a contribution to the counseling field. Both in the interviews a year ago and clearly in this interview, the relationship with me has been very important to Sylvia.]
C 33: (Pause 10 seconds.) Looks to me as though your eyes are saying something, but I
don¡¯t know what. (Smiles and laughs.)
S 34: Well, I¡¯m thinking about how moved I¡¯ve been when I¡¯ve heard your voice a few
times over the past year. (C: Hmm.) And now I¡¯m here. C 34: That made a...
S 35: I wanna take it in ¨C (C: Mhm.) being here.
C 35: Mhm. (Pause 3 seconds.) I guess you¡¯re saying that I mean a good deal to you.
S 36: Well, this time with you. (Nods.) Yes, you, mhm. (Smiles) (Pause 12 seconds) I¡¯m
thinking about what I want to talk about or I¡¯m feeling kind of empty right now
about talking. (Pause 5 seconds.)
C 36: Can you tell me what I do mean to you?
S 37: (Smiles.) Yes, I can. (Pause 8 seconds.) Well, (Pause 4 seconds) I think the best
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 31

thing that I like to think about you is that as I understand your writings, I have not read very much that you¡¯ve written, but that you have, that you live what you write about. And my understanding of a lot of popular writers are they write one thing and somehow they just don¡¯t quite live that. They live something very different. And so I think of you as, (laughs) um, (pauses) wonderful in that way and not, uh... (Pause 3 seconds.)
C 37: But what does that mean to you?
S 38: (Sighs.) (Pause 3 seconds.) Well that it¡¯s what I would like to be more: (C: Mhm.
Mhm.) to have values and be able to, to do them (pauses) and to live them.
C 38: (Pause 4 seconds.) You¡¯d like to have a good match between your life (S: Mhm.)
and what you believe (S: Mhm. Mhm.) and value.
S 39: (Pause 3 seconds.) And what I also sense about you is, uh, like ¡°patience¡± isn¡¯t the
right word, but I see you as being comfortable with yourself so much so that
whatever I or anyone else says or does, doesn¡¯t (pause 3 seconds) get you uptight. C 39: (Laughs.)
S 40: (Laughing.) And maybe it does. (C: Mhm.) Sometimes it probably does ¡®cause you¡¯re a human being.
C 40: It certainly does, that¡¯s right.
S 41: But it doesn¡¯t seem like it does (C: Mhm. Mhm.) too much.
[Carl: I really was not quite accepting of her, uh, of her feeling that, uh, in the relationship I clearly was not uptight. It strikes me that what she¡¯s saying here is, uh, practically a, uh, statement of the, uh, attitudes that, uh, we have found most effective in therapy. She¡¯s saying that she experiences me as being genuine. Uh, she experiences me
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 32

as caring about her. Uh, and I think it¡¯s quite clear that she feels that I understand her empathically. And those are the elements that, uh, both in experience and in research have shown up as being the most, uh, potent elements in a counseling relationship.]
S 42: And I like that. I would like to be more present (C: Nods.) and, and comfortable
with myself so that other people, including my children and so forth and so on, could do what they do, and that I could be able to be a source of support and not be personally threatened (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) by this little thing and that little thing.
C 42: And that, that has meaning to me. You¡¯d like to be sufficiently accepting of yourself, that then you can be comfortable with what your children do or what other people do (S: Nods.) and not, uh, (S: Mhm.) not feel frightened, (S: Hmm.) thrown off balance.
S 43: (Nods.) Mhm. And I¡¯ve enjoyed through the year in the few letters that I¡¯ve gotten from you, your warmth, and interest in me, in my life. I¡¯ve liked that a lot from (C: Mhm.) you. And at the time those letters were written we had no plans to (C: No.) make a movie (C: No.) or all that stuff so that was really enjoyable. (Pause 5 seconds.) Do you feel answered well?
C 43: Yeah. Mhm. Mhm. (Pause 15 seconds.) And I¡¯m interested enough in you to know of any other things in your life that are important to you or that, uh, that are difficult for ya, or whatever.
S 44: (Pause 15 seconds.) Well, I¡¯d like to go one of two ways. I don¡¯t know which yet. Uh, one way would be back to the single working mother business. I¡¯m not sure where we might go with that, but I know it¡¯s a big thing for me. And another way
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 33

would be to go with the difficulty I see myself in having with my relationships with men. (C: Mhm. Mmm.) (Pause 3 seconds.) I do so much analyzing (smiles) that I, I feel like throwing up my hands. ¡°What¡¯s the use of even talking about it?¡± But I...
C 44: But you do have (S: I...) difficulties in...
S 45: Yeah. I¡¯ll, I¡¯ll go with the men. (C: Okay.) And that¡¯s the most frightening thing
for me to talk about (C: Mhm.) on this film because people that I know will probably be seeing this (C: Mhm.) and men that I know. (4 second pause.) I see myself, uh, and this, this is real scattered in my mind. (Sighs.) Scattered, (smiles) and looking every which way. (C: Mhm.) Well, I see myself making acquaintance with men, many men, I mean not just one man (C: Mhm.) and spending some time with that person. And then, um, feeling that they lost interest in me or that I turned them off. And I tell myself things like, ¡°You can¡¯t expect every man you meet to fall in love with you.¡± (C: Mhm.) And, um, let¡¯s see, (smiles) what else? (C: But you feel that you...) Oh and then I¡¯ll tell myself all these reasonable... ¡°Of course this man doesn¡¯t like me because I¡¯m this and I¡¯m that and....¡± But, I don¡¯t very often feel the disappointment and confusion about ¡°Well I had a good time with that man.¡± And it seems to me like he must not have had a good time with me because I didn¡¯t hear from him again, or I did and things went such and such a way. And, uh...
C 45: Sounds like it seems kind of mysterious to you. (S: Uh-huh.) Why the men lose interest in you.
S 46: Uh-huh. And then I have feedback from one person, one man friend of mine, who Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 34

says that I create, ya know I turn people off, men, myself. And so it¡¯s like it¡¯s all, it¡¯s all my doing anyway. (C: Mhm.) But I have felt lately impotent about how to, (Pause 7 seconds.) how to have a successful long rel- long lasting relationship with a man. Successful, I don¡¯t mean perfect, I mean (C: Yeah. Mhm.) workable. (C: Mhm.) And, uh, I think workable is successful (C: Mhm.) these days. (Smiles.) Yeah.
C 46: Well, that¡¯s a part of your life in which you just haven¡¯t had the kind of, um, success that you wish you had had. Mhm. Mhm. An important lack in some way.
S 47: (Nods.) Now I¡¯m remembering we talked about this before.
C 47: A little bit.
S 48: A little bit, right. (Sighs.) (Pause 7 seconds.) And I do that, the kind of analyzing
that ¡®¡±Well I have all these habits like, uh, I, um, I like to be by myself, I¡¯m not real generous and outgoing (C: Nods.) and taking care of, of people that I meet.¡± And the woman that I live with says that she doesn¡¯t see me doing that at all like, ¡°Oh come in I¡¯ll fix you dinner, I¡¯ll do this, I¡¯ll do that.¡± Like I don¡¯t do that. (C: Nods) And, and so I¡¯m confused about do I need to do that to be in a close relationship? It doesn¡¯t seem to me like I should (C: Mhm.) need to sell out to be um enjoyed and wanted.
C 48: I gather what you mean by ¡°selling out¡± is that if you, if you really put yourself out in kind of an artificial way, you don¡¯t want that. Is that what you¡¯re saying?
[Carl: This is a good example of a client experiencing confusion. And, uh, she tries to be,
to talk about it rationally. But it¡¯s clear that what she is experiencing is just confusion itself. I feel this could have been a better response had I really heard her feeling that she
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 35

is powerless in, her, uh, relationships with men that she simply doesn¡¯t have what it takes to build a workable relationship. I believe this feeling that, uh, ¡°I have some fundamental lack in myself¡± is one of the commonest feelings that one meets in counseling situations. Almost all of us at times feel ¡°there must be some terrible flaw in me or I wouldn¡¯t have such problems in my life.¡±]
S 49: Yes, if I do all these things for a man, so then he¡¯ll want me.
C 49: Mhm. Kind of buying his favor, (S: Nods. Mhm.) as it were. And you just don¡¯t
see yourself doing that. Don¡¯t wanna do that.
S 50: Or wanting to do it. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) (S: Nods.) And then I... another question,
hard question, I ask myself is, ¡°Well, I¡¯m choosing men to relate to that don¡¯t know how to give in the way that I want to be given to.¡± (C: Mhm. Mhm.) And then I try (smiles) to figure that one out. (C: Mhm.) ¡°Oh simple, I¡¯m choosing, that just means I need to choose differently.¡± (C: Mhm.) And then I look around and it doesn¡¯t seem so simple.
C 50: Mhm. You say you¡¯re trying to analyze and analyze and analyze what, ¡°what lack in me?¡± or ¡°you know what lack in me?¡¯ I guess your asking yourself mostly, ¡°What lack in me keeps, (S: Hmm.) keeps me from having a lasting (S: Mhm.) relationship with men?¡±
S 51: And one thing that now I¡¯m recalling that really frightened me was I was talking- I lived with my husband for eight years (C: Nods.) and I felt rejected by him and I left him. (C: Nods.) And I left him for a man I was very much in love with that I¡¯ve been very close to (C: Mhm.) for five years. But he¡¯s also... like, I moved away from him but I felt left (smiles) by him also. And so this man friend of mine
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 36

said to me, ¡°Well, what¡¯s wrong with you that you can¡¯t keep a man?¡± And that, uh, that really scared me inside because when I look at the situation in a practical, sensible way that doesn¡¯t seem like reality. (C: Mhm.) But then I don¡¯t know maybe it¡¯s true.
C 51: But that her saying that (S: He.) he saying that, (S: Uh-huh.) uh, really does touch something in you. ¡°Is there something wrong with me (S: Uh-huh.) that I....¡°
S 52: That I don¡¯t see. (C: Mhm.) And, and, uh, just the fact that it touched me so much shows me that there¡¯s something there.
C 52: Mhm. It, (S: Sighs.) it wouldn¡¯t bother you that much, or you wouldn¡¯t think so much about it if there wasn¡¯t something in you that that refers to.
S 53: Mhm. (Nods.) And I, (sighs) I see my mother that way a lot, that my mother not being able to have a successful relationship with a man and so that¡¯s been my model and... (Pause 3 seconds) like, why can¡¯t...
C 53: You¡¯re saying, ¡°Maybe, maybe I¡¯m just following the same pattern as my mother.¡± S 54: Mhm. Well, I am in that respect and I don¡¯t like it. (C: Mhm.) And I¡¯m not willing
to do a bunch of crummy stuff that I... (C: Mhm.) (Pause 6 seconds.) So, right now (smiles) I¡¯m living alone (C: Mhm.) and I¡¯m not doing any crummy stuff. (C: Mhm.) And I also have some very nice relationships. It¡¯s (smiles) those shades of black and white. (Pause 8 seconds.) But I do feel a lot of confusion about building an intimate relationship. (C: Mhm.) A monogamous type (C: Mhm. Mhm.) or primary...
C 54: So you can have good times and all that, but still there is this nagging question or these nagging questions, ¡°Am I just following my mother¡¯s pattern?¡± ¡°What is
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 37

wrong with me that I don¡¯t have a permanent relationship with a man?¡±
[Sylvia: I don¡¯t ever recall feeling like Carl wasn¡¯t understanding me or... because if I did have that feeling there was something I could do about it right then and there in terms of helping him to better understand me, so then I did feel understood. His intention was to very much to be with me and, uh, if I got the sense that he wasn¡¯t that we could talk about that.]
[Carl: I think this interview is a good example of the fact that, uh, when the relationship is good, the client is able to take more and more risks. Sylvia begins with material which is quite present in her awareness, and yet by the end of the interview she is dipping into material which she doesn¡¯t understand, which she¡¯s a little bit fearful of expressing. Uh, She has gone several levels deeper during the interview and to me that¡¯s, uh, the mark of a process of therapy that in the long run will be successful. Perhaps through this whole interview, it¡¯s evident that, uh, following the client¡¯s experiencing, being a companion to the client in whatever, uh, is going on in her does lead to opening up new, uh, areas of concern, new explorations, leads her into new, uh, territories.]
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 38

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
In this interview the responses of the therapist (C) (Carl Rogers), and the client (S) (Sylvia) are numbered for easy reference.
 Carl Rogers Demonstrates Client-Centered Therapy Transcription from the Video of the Film "Struggle for Acceptance¡±
Session 5 with Sylvia - 1975
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (1975). The struggle for self-acceptance.]
[Commentaries are typed in brackets and italics to distinguish from the actual interview.]
Carl Commentary 1: [This is my fifth interview with Sylvia. The fourth interview had been held on the previous day. Prior to that there had been the three interviews a year earlier. The interview will be shown as it was recorded, but with comments both from Sylvia and from myself at points where we felt we wished to clarify what was going on,uh, or to make some comment about what was going on.]
Carl: Well, where would you like to start this morning?
Sylvia1: Well, uh, I want to tell you about something that I've been thinking about and that¡¯s it's a, a sharing more than (C: M-hm.) telling you a problem. (C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 2: [So often clients and counselors get the feeling that, uh, the relationship is one which must be filled only with problems. Uh, Sylvia gives a little indication of that, this is just a sharing, it's not a problem.]
S1 (continued): And that is I¡¯ve just recently noticed in myself that I've been learning. (She laughs a little.) (C: M-hm.) And that's a big deal. Uh, I hear people say all the time, ¡°Oh, I've learned so much, I learned this and I learned that and that was such a learning experience.¡± And I, all these years that I've been grown up, I haven't felt any learning, and I feel, ¡°Well, what did you learn and how did you know that you learned it?¡± And it was a mystery to me. (C: M-hm.) And just the last few weeks, or actually I've been realizing in the last year mainly is that I¡¯ve learned some things (C: M-hm.) and I know I've learned them and I, I know that, okay, that I'm at this point and with a certain situation or idea and that six months ago or three months ago it was different. (C: Uh-huh.) And so I'm feeling my learning and that's really exciting.
C Commentary 3: [A relationship should be one in which good feelings have just as much place as bad feelings, and here she's bringing out some very positive feelings about
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 39

herself, which is a healthy and valid part of a counseling relationship. It's always exciting to me to, uh, hear a client telling of positive steps which, uh, he or she has been taking, and here Sylvia sounds confident as she's doing something that she has decided to do in her own way, not necessarily following all the books, but doing what she feels and experiences is right.]
C1: And it¡¯s the awareness of it that's new. (S: Uh-huh. Yeah.) That you're beginning to realize, ¡°Hey, I am different in this respect, (S: Uh-huh.) I've learned something.¡±
S2: I've changed. (C: Uh-huh.) And I can see the difference and feel the difference. (C: Uh-huh.) Yeah.
C2: What are some of those differences?
S3: Well, (small laugh) um, I, I've made a decision to be more strict with my children (C: M-hm, m-hm.) and to, uh, to listen to them but decide that I'm their mother and I know many things they don't, and that I will make many more decisions than (C: M-hm.) I've made in the past. And uh-
C3: M-hm, m-hm. Sounds as though you feel a bit stronger that way.
S4: Yes. And and I've been trying it. (C: Uh, m-hm.) Trying being the more strict person and it's working beautifully. (C: Uh-huh.) Uh, they at first they, you know, have their little resistance or whatever it is but then we go on with the program, which is my program more, (C: M-hm.) and I feel a lot better about that as being uh uh helping children to adjust to the world.
C4: I mean, sounds, sounds like you feel more like a grown-up mother.
S5: M-hm. Capable. (C: M-hm.) Of making appropriate decisions. (C: M-hm.) For them. And another area is sex. And, uh, and I, I've done a lot of things in the past year, in the past mainly year that I haven't done before. That is, I've had intercourse with a few different men (C: M-hm.) and put myself in situations where before I was absolutely unwilling to do because of my fears and, and I've learned some things about myself. Like I know a lot more right now today about what kind of sexual relationship, what kind of intimate relationships that I want to have with men and that feels good. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) Beca ... and, um, and it only came through, uh, risking I mean there was no, it only became through trying things out, there was no amount (C: Uh-huh, uh-huh.) There was no amount of, of therapy or reading or thinking or talking (C: M-hm.) that helped me to learn those things, (C: M-hm.) but it was feeling strong enough within myself that I can take chances.
C5: So risking has been the road to learning (S: Yeah.) in the sexual area.
S6: Uh-huh. (C: M-hm.) And it is with my children (C: M-hm.) and it is with relating
to people in many ways, not just sexually. (She smiles.) (C: M-hm.) Other ways too. Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 40

(C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 4: [Sylvia is showing a lot of risking behavior. She's risking a good deal to talk about things like this on film. But what's more important is that she has come to the point in her own life where, where she realizes that her own experience is the best guide for her, not books, not therapy, not anything outside of herself. It is her own experience from which she can learn, and here she is learning in a very sensitive and, uh, personal area and is willing to share that with us.]
S6 (continued): Reaching out to people and approaching strangers and, uh ...
C6: Taking all kinds of risks that you hadn't before.
S7: Some. More, (C: M-hm.) which, I mean I, I don't know about all kinds. (C: Yeah.) Quite a few, and it's been exciting (C: M-hm.) and hard.
C7: And I guess that leads to a, uh, to a deeper kind of learning, or at any rate, a learning that you feel more sure of. I guess, I get a sense of assurance in what you're talking about. An assurance in you.
C Commentary 5: [One thing that has been true with Sylvia in every interview we've had is that she thinks carefully about what she says, she thinks carefully about what I say, and when what I say is not correct, doesn't match her experience, she's quite willing to correct me. She is very precise in both describing her own feelings and also in making sure that my response to them is also accurate.]
S8: Well, yes. Yes and no. (C: Uh-huh.) And I ... I ... feel more im... like I, I was saying before, I feel more immature and more and I'm more aware of my immaturity. (C: M-hm.) They're both, uh, a part of each other. (C: M-hm.) And uh, does that make, does that, I guess I'm thinking that it just sounds crazy.
C8: No, I don't
S9: To say that I feel more mature because I know I'm how, I know more about how immature I am.
C9: Uh-huh. No, that makes a lot of sense to me.
S Commentary 1: [I was surprised at what I said made sense to him. I think that I thought that it made sense to me, but that doesn't necessarily mean it would make sense to other people. I mean, it made in my own system of what was said. It felt good that he could understand me and he knew I that, that it made sense to him too.]
C Commentary 6: [It's important to Sylvia to make sure that she's accurately understood. Can anyone understand how she can be more mature by being aware of her immaturity? Well, to me, that's quite understandable, but it's clear that she wants to make certain that
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 41

my understanding extends to that degree.]
S10: It does.
C10: Uh-huh. Because you¡¯re, you're uh more aware of all aspects of yourself (S: M- hm.) and it sounds a more acceptant of them too. ¡°Yes, I'm mature in certain ways (S: M-hm.) and here's some ways I know I'm immature.¡±
S11: And I didn't know that before, (C: Uh-huh.) or I, I knew I felt uncomfortable that I didn't understand it. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) But that's related to something I've been thinking about, I think, about being here with you and, uh, and telling myself two things. (C: M-hm.) One is, ¡°Oh, you're just a, I'm just a dependent personality,¡± you know, Carl Rogers or blah-blah-blah-blah, don't, I don't run my own life. (C: M-hm.) I go for help a lot. (C: M-hm.) And then I tell myself I¡¯ve always been so strong and so together and having everything so worked out in my head that I don't allow myself to, to be helpless in a situation where it might be (C: M-hm.) good for me. (C: M-hm.) Like right now here with you, I would like to be more helpless, which to me means open, I think. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) To what to us and, uh, and I see myself being, uh, together and not being helpless. (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 2: [I think at that point I was feeling concern that I was just gonna go to another session of being all in control of things and and rattling on and on. I probably made a conscious decision that that I have to do something to, to break that and, uh, which was talk about it, talk about my fear. My fear was or concern that I wouldn't learn anything.]
C11: Sounds as though you, you voice that as a conflict, but it sounds as though really you're more on the, on the side of the second aspect that, uh, uh, to be open and, and in that sense helpless and vulnerable, I guess might be a possible term too, um, is something you, you really believe that's what you are, rather than that you're a totally dependent person and really helpless and have to, have to run for help. I sort of get the feeling you like this aspect of you that is able to be with me in a way that is, uh, more open, more vulnerable perhaps.
S12: Well, I like it and I also scold myself for being dependent, (C: M-hm.) so there's
C12: There are the two sides, uh-huh.
S13: there's something missing in the middle to connect, (C: M-hm.) and I it seems like you might have been talking about that and I still didn't hear it.
C13: (Nods.) M-hm. (S: Mm.) So really to get it more accurately, you scold yourself for for being dependent, for, for wanting (S: M-hm.) to be here, for example, with me, (S: M-hm.) and yet at the same time you, you feel. uh, well, that's good, I, I really like that, but where's the, where's the integration of those two, uh, points of view. (S: M-hm.) (Sylvia nods.)
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 42

S Commentary 3: [That seemed to me like a very excellent, um, not paraphrase, but when he, you know, tells me back (C: M-hm.) what he thinks I meant, it, um, solidified what I expressed in the previous comment about that there was something missing. It made more sense to me.]
S14: That's right. (small laugh) (pause of 7 seconds) May I hold your hands again? C14: Sure. M-hm. (They lean closer and clasp hands and remain holding hands.) S15: To feel that old feeling.
C15: Okay.
S Commentary 4: [When we did that filming in A_____, we held each others' hands the whole time, and I imagine that it occurred me that it might be good to do that again. I feel good. At that time, I, I wanted to get away from being in my head so completely the whole time, experiencing.]
C Commentary 7: [I felt very comfortable during this holding of hands. Uh, I'm reminded of a friend of mine who said that he did eye therapy and, uh, in a sense that's what this was. Our eyes were very much in contact, and, uh, I think as much was going on at a non-verbal way as in a verbal way. It was a close relationship, and we both experienced it that way.]
S16: (Clears throat.) (pause of 11 seconds) I would like to be less, uh, less strong right now. I would like to give myself the gift of not having to be sensible (C: M-hm.) and reasonable and (C: M-hm, m-hm.) Also the protection, (C: M-hm.) protect, (C: M-hm.) protect myself.
C16: M-hm, m-hm, m-hm. Really would be giving yourself a gift if you could just kind of let go (S: M-hm.) and not, uh, not be so (S: M-hm.) competent (S: M-hm.) and able. (S: Mm.) (She nods.) (pause of 5 seconds)
C Commentary 8: [It seems clear that the reason she wants to hold my hands is that she wants to experience something that is very frightening to her, namely to drop her competent, reasonable, strong self and let herself be some of the weakness and vulnerability that she is.]
S17: And I think it helps to touch ( C: M-hm.) (Carl nods.) you, to, to, to let go of the shoulds, of my (small laugh)
C17: M-hm, m-hm. And you feel some contact and maybe you can say, ¡°Well, maybe I don't have to be so strong, so (S: M-hm, mm.) Maybe I can just let go more.¡±
S18: (pause of 5 seconds) Yes. (small laugh) (She sighs.) ( pause of 22 seconds) I Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 43

want to get away from all, um, my rationalizing right now this minute, and I don't know how to do that (C: M-hm.) except to shut up. (Carl nods.) (C: M-hm, m- hm.) And, (pause of 5 seconds) so it's not like I have so much a desire to sit and not talk and look in your eyes as I have a desire to not be the way I am all the time. (C: M-hm.) And I don't know yet (C: M-hm, m-hm.) what else to do. (C: M- hm.)
C Commentary 9: [In the interviews that we held a year ago, the silences were very long and Sylvia found a, a great deal of security and, uh, seemed to profit a great deal from holding my hands during the interview, and here she, uh, returns to the pattern of a year ago. It's another indication of the fact that these interviews with her perhaps rest more solidly on just the fact of the relationship than they do even on the content of what, uh, she's saying and talking about.]
C18: Have to be kind of silent, to let go of that rational and rationalizing part of you.
S19: M-hm. (pause of 25 seconds) It feels easier to focus on, uh, in this position that I'm in now with you I feel more focused, (C: M-hm.) (He nods.) yeah.
C19: Are there any things that sort of come bubbling up?
S20: Yeah, I know it's something I want to talk about. (She smiles.)
C20: Okay. M-hm. (pause of 10 seconds) (She smiles.) But it's not easy, huh.
S21: No, it's not easy and I'm enjoying the richness of feeling (C: M-hm.) your hands this way and letting go of some more of, of the camera business (C: M-hm.) and the ... (C: M-hm, m-hm.) And, uh, and the fear about bringing up something that (laughs) (clears throat) and knowing that in about fifteen minutes it'll all seem, um, (sighs, smiling) I don't know not quite as serious. (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 5: [It just had to take its own time for me to get to where I could feel like I could say the words that I needed to say. It was almost like waiting and just like, uh, you know, what else is new while I'm waiting? For something that took a natural process that it had to take.]
C Commentary 10: [If anyone has a doubt about the value of silences, it should be removed by this interchange. Sylvia's saying, ¡°I'm doing more work when I'm silent than I am when I'm talking.¡±]
S Commentary 6: [His specific comments or the content of his comments is not necessarily helpful as opposed to not helpful, but what it does do that is valuable is that it gives me something to bounce against. It's a stimulation to better focus myself.]
S21 (continued): There's something I've been wanting to talk over with you.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 44

C21: Okay.
S22: Good. I'm real attracted to black people. (C: M-hm.) And, uh, that's about the craziest part of me, um, I'm ashamed (C: Mm.) Um, I'm embarrassed, not right now this minute, but when I'm out walking around. (Carl is nodding.) (C: When it happens, m-hm.) And living my life.
C22: You feel what an awful thing it is that I'm attracted to black people. (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 11: [I think that from the time that she first wanted to hold my hands, I felt that she probably was going to make use of that closer relationship to get to something that she hadn't been able to express before, and now she's taking really a great risk in talking about something very private, very personal.]
S23: Not, and not all the black people I see (C: M-hm.) but a lot. (C: M-hm.) And, uh, like the black people that I talked it over with, it seems, it doesn't seem like any problem at all, they understand perfectly. (C: M-hm.) And, but my family, I think it's a real painful situation for them when I have as many black friends as I do. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) And-
C23: That sounds like not only your family looks down on it or something but that you scold yourself for it too.
S24: Uh-huh, right. I, I think there's something wrong with me.
C24: Yeah, that's it.
S25: Um. But it doesn't-
C25: ¡°What kind of a crazy person am I that I feel attracted (S: Well, sick...) to so many blacks?¡±
S26: Sick, sick I think of it as
C26: Sick, that's
S27: and ne... neurotic, um. (C: Hm.) Strange. (C: Mm.) (She closes her eyes and clears her throat.) (pause of 7 seconds)
C27: You really feel that there's something sick in you that causes you to have so many black friends.
S28: (Opening her eyes) Well, I keep looking for a reasonable explanation (C: M-hm.) and there is none. (She laughs a little)
C28: So there isn't any reason except that you feel that way.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 45

S29: M-hm. And I ...
C29: And that isn't good enough.
S30: Well, I, I, I've been struggling so long to accept that in myself and I'm still fighting. It's like I'm fighting to accept that in myself and, and letting go rather than thinking it's a terrible thing (C: M-hm.) and and that I can't let other people know. (C: Hm, m-hm, m-hm.) And, uh,
C30: You feel ¡°I should not feel that way. I shouldn't be that way. Sick.¡±
C Commentary 12: [I think by that response I was trying to exaggerate her feelings in order to assist her in, uh, becoming more accepting of them, but as I, uh, listen
to it I think I might have responded more powerfully by responding to
her struggle to accept herself as a person who is attracted to blacks.]
S31: Like when I, wh ... , I imagine when I meet a black person that I am attracted
to, that that person will know (He nods.) (C: M-hm, mm-hm.) and I always wonder if
they can tell.
C31: Mm, see if it shows. (S: Uh-huh.) M-hm, m-hm.
S32: And that they'll think I'm strange. (C: M-hm.) M-hm. And it has something to do with all the black/white sex stuff that goes on, like, um, black women and white men which is very foreign to me, I have very little thinking or, um, concern about that. But the black men/white women thing, (C: M-hm.) um. and I'm attracted to a lot of black men. (C: M-hm.) Yeah.
C32: It has something to do with the sexual attraction.
S33: I know, yeah, it does, I know it does. (C: M-hm.) But it's not just that, it's also (C: M-hm.) children and and women and lifestyle (C: M-hm.) and as I see it through my tunnel vision, which I do. (C: Uh-huh.) (clears her throat)
C33: So I guess you're saying, um, yeah, there's a sexual element in it but I'm also attracted to their way of living.
S34: M-hm. That I see. (C: Yeah.) And I, but I think what I see isn't what is.
C34: (He nods.) That's partly your fantasy or something. (Sylvia nods.) (pause of 8 seconds)
S35: Maybe putting that, that, this on this film will help me that (She smiles.) stand on the ground and be who I am. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) And not be so ashamed, so embarrassed and so, (C: M-hm.) um, uncomfortable.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 46

C35: In a way you're saying it out loud and really in a wa ..., in a sense, publicly, may help you to feel ¡°I don't need to be so ashamed of that.¡± (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 13: [I've filmed a number of interviews, but I never had a client knowingly make use of the filming to try to gain more acceptance of self and clearly that's what Sylvia is doing in this interchange. By putting herself clearly on record, she feels perhaps then she will feel less ashamed, less sick, more, uh, truly acceptant of the person that she is and the experiences that she has.]
S36: And I tell myself I should be joyful, I mean, (C: M-hm.) (She laughs a little.) why, why negative? (C: M-hm.) And I, I guess, you know, the culture or I don't know, I (sighs) (pause of 6 seconds)
C36: But you feel disapproved of probably, certainly by your family and maybe by the culture in this respect.
S37: My friends don't understand. (C: M-hm.) My white friends.
C37: M-hm, m-hm. (He nods.) (pause of 10 seconds) Makes you feel different. (S: Hm, hm.) Set apart or something like that. (pause of 6 seconds)
S38: Well, sometimes I feel different but I know a lot of other people, I believe a lot of other people feel the same way. (C: M-hm.) and I know a lot of other white women are attracted to black men. So I believe that's common.
C38: So that somehow you know you're not alone in this.
C Commentary 14: [Here's another example of the fact that expressing all the negative attitudes she has toward her own attraction to blacks leads her to realize this really is not so bad after all; there are positive sides of it. Other people, other women feel the same way.]
S39: But it seems like the strength of my feelings and, uh, the on-goingness and my de ..., my desire to identify with the black culture and, (C: M-hm, m-hm) um, is. is what seems out of proportion to me. That I feel out of proportion about it. (They both nod.)
C39: M-hm. So Okay, other women feel the same way but not to the degree that you do, you think. (S: M-hm.) That's kind of out of (S: M-hm.) Out of scale.
S40: Or in general to the degree too, not just man/woman, but (C: M-hm.) people. (pause of 15 seconds) Maybe I, (small laugh) it'll come a time accepting that part of myself.
C40: Maybe someday you won't be ashamed of yourself for that.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 47

S41: M-hm. Maybe someday I can be proud of myself. (C: M-hm.) And for what I believe and feel. (C: M-hm.) And I'm gradually learning to do that.
C41: Uh-huh, m-hm. So, perhaps what you are and what you feel will be something you can take real satisfaction in instead of feeling (S: M-hm.) how shameful.
S42: M-hm. And to me it's it's a sign of my growth is being able to do what I'm doing with you now, you'll make a film. (C: M-hm.) (She laughs.) (C: M-hm, m-hm, m- hm, m-hm, m-hm.) It's a real brazen thing to do. (C: Yeah.) M-hm.
C42: Feel this is a risk. (S: M-hm.) And that's a sign of learning and of growth.
S43: M-hm. Well, also it somehow it's a little different from a risk in the sense of some of my friends say, ¡°A film? Wh... What do you want to do that for?¡± I mean, there's suspiciousness about it and ...
C43: M-hm, m-hm. (He nods.) So that's seen as another strange part of you. S44: Well, not so much, I mean, that's not a
C44: Not so.
S45: It doesn't bother me. (clears throat) (pause of 11 seconds) Sometimes I, well, right now (She laughs and he nods.) sometimes, I have the sense of talking away what we were talking about and I'm wondering, if I went away, if I withdraw from the subject, uh, what's your perspective? It seems like we were talking about my attraction to black people and now we're not. And I'm, I don't know, like did we finish talking about it or did I withdraw?
S Commentary 7: [My sense is that I was feeling confused about what was going on.]
C Commentary 15:[I think this is a sample of Sylvia's sharp awareness of her own experiencing. I don't believe that in content we had left the subject of her attraction to blacks. But she realizes in herself that somehow she has withdrawn from that. She's, as she says, talked away from it. Obviously, that's because it has been a, a frightening subject to her. Perhaps also because she feels she's gone as far as she can go with it at the present time.]
S45 (continued): Um
C45: It's more of your analyzing it, isn't it, trying to think (She nods.) about what's happening. ¡°Did I run away from it? Or was I finished with it?¡± (S: M-hm.) Or continue think about it
S46: analyze it (small laugh)
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 48

C46: Instead of asking, ¡°Do I feel as though I'm finished with it? (S: M-hm.) Do I feel as though I'm escaping from it?¡±
S47: I like that. I like your your questions, or comments. (C: M-hm.) Do I feel finished? (pause of 10 seconds) No, I don't, I don't feel, I don't know (He nods.) about escaping (C: M-hm.) and feeling finished, it's
C47: The feeling is one of uncertainty.
S48: M-hm. (She nods.) (pause of 35 seconds) Well I I feel like I want to go back and listen to what we just talked about, (C: M-hm.) that I didn't hear it very well. (C: M-hm, m-hm, m-hm, m-hm, m-hm.) And ...
C Commentary 16: [This is one of the commonest experiences when a person delves into areas that are sensitive, where they've exposed themselves in, in ways that make them very vulnerable. Sylvia, like many other clients, hardly knows what she has said because it has come so close to her inner feelings, because it¡¯s such a delicate experience. Incidentally, this is one point where a wrong response on the part of the counselor can be very frightening and very threatening because her inner self is really very exposed at this point. This inability to remember is the, uh, defense of the self against being changed too rapidly. It probably would be very good for her to hear this later and to begin to accept more fully what she's just been expressing.]
C48: ¡°What did I say? What did I feel?¡± You'd like to have a rerun of it and it
S49: M-hm. Like I just went jabber-jabber-jabber-jabber. (C: M-hm.) And all that. (C: M-hm.) And so-
C49: Sounds like you scold yourself for that, as though, ¡°Oh, I just talk talk-talk.¡± (She nods.) (S: M-hm.) It didn't sound like just talk-talk-talk to me.
S50: It didn't?
C50: No.
C Commentary 17: [Throughout these interviews, my own feelings have been largely empathic and caring ones. Here's the first time that I express some other feeling of my own. I simply couldn't permit her to scold herself for what she's been doing, and so I said, ¡°It doesn't sound like, uh, just talk-talk-talk to me,¡± which was a very real feeling on my part at that moment.]
S Commentary 8: [At that time I had the feeling that Carl was really asking me something that he wanted to know. Like genuinely interested and concerned about that.]
S51: (pause of 6 seconds) Well, I would like to hear it again, (He nods.) and it has, it, Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 49

and slowed down somehow, (C: M-hm.) and I now (small laugh) I could think like taking your hand and looking at you and slowing down. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) And then when I'm slowing--and that's what I want to do ... (C: M-hm.) But while I'm doing it, I'm scolding myself. ¡°What are you doing this for?¡±
C51: M-hm. (pause of 5 seconds) Let me give you a very brief rerun of part of it. You were saying, ¡°I'm ashamed of myself for being attracted to black men. Uh, I know many other women have some of the same feeling, but it seems to me I have that feeling disproportionately strong and uh my family is critical of that, the culture is critical. Um, I'd like to be able to accept those feelings in myself. Maybe I'm making a little bit of progress along that line, but still it does seem a need to be a a strange part of me that I don't understand.¡± (She nods.) (pause of 10 seconds)
S52: That's right.
C52: ¡°And part of that attraction is sexual but I'm also attracted to their children, to the way they live, to a lot of things about them.¡± (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 18: [Sometimes when I show what an accurate listener I am, I feel proud of myself and I do in this moment.]
S53: And what I, what you said that strikes me the most is it¡¯s the part of me I don't understand, (C: M-hm.) it's a part of me I don't understand.
C53: It just is, but you can't quite uh can't quite get at the reasons for it. You have to have the reasons.
S54: (Laughs a little) (pause of 5 seconds) And I don't know why I have to have the reasons, (C: m-hm.) I don't have to explain to anybody. (C: M-hm.) So it seems like I don't have to have a reason. (She smiles.)
C54: M-hm. (pause of 20 seconds) So maybe the intellectual understanding isn't as important as you thought it was.
S55: I think the acceptance is what's most important, (C: M-hm, m-hm.) my acceptance. (C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 19: [As she has shown throughout the, uh, interview, as she says, she analyzes and analyzes. She has to see the reasons for all of her behavior, and
now she's taking a little bit lighter look at that, and realizing, "I don't have to have a reason for every bit of my behavior, I don't have to understand all of it. I can simply accept it. Perhaps I can simply accept it." I admire Sylvia's courage in being willing to voice the very, uh, intimate feelings she has on film. I believe that both the expression of those feelings will be constructive for her and that the willingness to share them with a wider audience will also have a positive effect in her life.]
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 50

C55: ¡°If I could accept it, I wouldn't have to understand in the sense of knowing the reasons.¡±
S56: (Nods.) Or explain to anybody. (He nods.) (C: M-hm, m-hm, m-hm.) M-hm.
C56: Sounds like that's what you're doing in imagination a lot, trying to explain it to somebody.
S57: M-hm. (pause of 25 seconds) It seems like I'll probably never understand it. (Both nod.) So I can make life a lot easier for myself by not trying. (They both nod.)
C57: M-hm. (pause of 5 seconds) It may be one of those things that if you can accept it, you wouldn't need to have all the explanations. (pause of 9 seconds)
S58: Wonder what (She closes her eyes for a moment, sighs and clears her throat.) what keeps me, um, feeling like I need to justify myself. (C: M-hm.) Like that's a more basic
C58: M-hm. It's a broader statement of it.
S59: than about a particular view, accepting myself about this and about that.
C59: M-hm. You would in general feel ¡°I have to justify myself with proper reasons.¡± S60: M-hm. (pause of 20 seconds) (smiles) Well, do you do that? Do you
C60: I suspect we all do, some. (S: Yeah.) M-hm.
S61: So there's nobody that just (Both laugh.) floats along on their (Both laugh.) intuition. That¡¯s not it either. So what I need is more balance really. (C: M-hm.) Not that I¡¯m wrong to justify it, but that I can be more, justify it less and feel more, (Both nod.) (C: M-hm, m-hm.) and feel comfortable. (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 9: [This experience that I had with Carl is, uh, real special to me and, uh, one of the things about it that feels real close to me is the emotional safety I felt with him. That there was somehow a, a boundary or a fence or a something that, uh, separated the space that I was in with Carl from the rest of the world and inside that space I was very safe and I would not be hurt. I didn't have to have any fear that I would be hurt no matter what I said or did, and the focus of my thinking was how very safe that felt. Another thing I felt from him that I think has affected me some over this time is that I felt, uh, like support from him to be myself, to listen to myself and to respond to myself and to care about, to put myself first. I think about how my life might have been changed by my experiences with Carl. I think Carl's caring for me in the way that he did, his, uh, modeling, helping me to learn to care for myself, where like maybe my most important resource would be myself. (C: Yeah.) So it seems to me that in his style of relating there's a lot of support to do that, a lot of encouragement and influence to listen to
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 51

myself.]
END OF SESSION
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 52

 This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Kathy Interview by Carl Rogers (Circa 1975)
[Source: Shostrom, E. L. (1975). Three approaches to psychotherapy II [Film]. Orange, CA.]
Rogers: I want to meet this client as a person. And I want our encounter to be that of two persons. I have no desire to have advance information regarding her. I'll work with whatever she wishes to reveal of herself. It's my hope that I can first of all be myself. Be present. Be real in the relationship. I usually find it easy, also, to feel a caring for the client. But I can't predict in advance whether I will feel that. I would like to let myself enter into her inner world of feelings and perceptions as accurately and as sensitively as I can. In order to experience that kind of empathy, I'11 need to lay aside, as far as possible, my own biases and preconceptions. The extent to which I can do that will to a considerable degree determine the progress which she is able to make in the time we have together. I feel I'm a responsible therapist. I'm responsible for doing my best to create a facilitative climate in which she can explore her feelings in the way that she desires, move toward the goals that she wishes to achieve. It's in this deep sense that my approach to therapy is centered in the client. Aiming to empower him or her to search out and experience the areas of conflict or pain, to perceive self in new ways, to choose to follow new options in behavior. It is my own self I find feelings other than those of caring and of understanding I'll feel free to express these; but as my own feelings, not as any judgment of or guide for the client. Or, especially on a first interview, I may have no other feelings than a prizing of the client and a desire to in-dwell in her experience. There's no way I can tell in advance. For me each encounter with a client is fresh, unpredictable, often enriching to my learning as well as hopefully, enriching the self-learning of the client. So I look forward with eagerness to whatever our time together may bring.
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy, Introduction, page 53

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 Carl Rogers¡¯ Interview with Kathy -- 1977
T: Hi, Kathy.
C: Hi, Dr. Rogers.
T: I'm really glad to meet you. C: Thank you.
T: And... I don't know whether you're feeling a little uptight under these lights and all, but I think I'm feeling a little uptight, but I don't think that will last very long. And I have, not having met you before I, I don't have any idea what sort of concerns or issues you want to bring up, but I'd be glad to hear whatever you want to say.
C1: I'm not quite sure where to begin.
T1: Uhm, hmm.
C2: But, uh, some of my concerns are, um, I've become very much aware since my husband was killed last December, um, my own feelings of aloneness.
T2: Uhm, hmm.
C3: And I don't think it¡¯s directly related to his death because we had been
separated for about four years before he was killed. And I, I became aware that, after he died especially, that he was really very important in my life. I was kind of using him as a shield against going out and having other relationships. And now he¡¯s gone and I can't use that anymore. And I feel very, very frightened of new male relationships.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 54

T3: So in some way his, his death, uh, really made you aware of the fear you have of, of new relationships, especially with men.
C4: Right, right. Definitely, I didn't have him. I didn't have that to hide behind anymore. And, uh, I had a tremendous feeling of loss when he died because I did care for him. But, um, in going out with other men lately, I just have this feeling of, uh, it's very strange. I'm very uncomfortable.
T4: So that, the feeling you have is something more than just the loss of him. It's a different feeling, a fee1ing of uneasy or scared or unsure.
C5: Yes. For a long time I didn't feel like going out and that was fine. I was going through my loss of him, but that was all right. I didn¡¯t push it or anything. But just recently I started going out and I've been aware for years of how lonely, I have been very, very lonely. I haven't been dating very much for the last four years, mostly just working and taking care of the kids. And um, I think I'm keeping myself in kind of a no-win situation where I'm really lonely. And yet it's kind of like I'm keeping myself there because I've got a guard around me, and I'd kind of like to break out of that.
T5: It¡¯s as though you're in some way sort of responsible for your loneliness.
C6: Yes, I know that. I'm very... I am.
T6: And that's something you'd like to break out of that shell, or that safeguard that you've been hiding behind.
C7: Part of me does.
T7: Part of you does. Ok, ok. C8: Part of me says, ¡°No way¡±.
T8: So it really is a very ambivalent, two-way thing. (C takes a breath) I suspect it's been pretty comfortable, um, behind that safeguard; it's more of risk if you break out. Is that part of it?
C9: I, I can almost, well I was going to say I can almost go back to the point where I really built up that safeguard in me when my marriage was going bad. Over five years ago and I could feel myself, and I know I did, I withdrew and I¡¯ve been withdrawn ever since. It's kind of like, ¡°No more. I don't want any more hurt.¡± So...
T9: Uhm, hmm, it's just too damn risky, taking the possibility of being hurt again. And you've withdrawn from that for a long time.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 55

C10: Uhm, hmm. See, and I've been aware of this for a long time too, but I never go beyond the awareness level.
T10: So that the knowledge isn't new, it's the um, question of what you do about it.
C11: That's right, that's right. How can one stay safe and still be open?
T11: The way you shake your head makes me feel, ¡°I don't see any way.¡±
C12: I don't, I really don¡¯t. If I did, maybe I probably would have done it a long time ago, but I don't.
T12: Just seems kind of unbearable to, to be, open with a person and yet feel safe.
C13: I, I think I'm a pretty open person to begin with. And uh, everything is fine in a relationship as long as the focus does not turn onto me.
T13: I see, I see. If you can keep the focus on the other person you're ok.
C14: That's right. And the focus on me up to a certain level, but not in the romantic kind of a way. A friendship, I would value that.
T14: But love, you want to, keep that at arms length.
C15: But you know, that's important though, because um, if a person doesn't want to really be your friend, how can you have them for a lover?
T15: Uhm, hmm.
C16: No way.
T16: Not quite sure I get that. You mean friendship is a necessary first step, is that what you're saying, or...
C17: It is for me.
T17: Yeah. (Long pause)
C18: We've gotten to the point where I won't go beyond.
T18: Uhm, hmm, that's what I was sort of thinking. You've thought your way this far, but then where do you...
C19: I've laid the cards out and that's all I want to play.
T19: So that, in this relationship it's like in your other relationships.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 56

C20: That's right.
T20: It goes so far and then, ¡°Let's stop. That's as far as I want to go.¡± (Pause) (C: Hmm.) If you go any further, there's a risk, isn't it?
C21: Yes, it is.
T21: And I think your eyes tell me you're feeling that risk right now. (Pause)
C22: So here I am. (Pause) I feel like saying to myself, ¡°Well you got this far. It's not so bad.¡± (Laughter) It's all right; I make the best out of it.
T22: It's all right up to this point.
C23: Yeah, right.
T23: So let¡¯s laugh it off.
C24: Yeah, make a joke. Talk about something else. T24: Could, very easy to run away from yourself.
C25: See, but that's it. I made a bargain with myself. There's two parts: the part that understands and it¡¯s all right, and the other part that's scared silly. But the part that understands isn¡¯t going to force the part that's scared. When it¡¯s safe enough, I'll be kind to myself.
T25: And let the scared part come out when, when you¡¯re ready for it, when...
C26: When the scared part feels ready. It¡¯s as if part of me is in a cave away from the rest of the world. But it cert-, I certainly can't come out of that cave, unless I know that it¡¯s all right, that there won't be a lot of pain to greet me. What's the sense in coming out? So it¡¯s up to the best of me to make sure that there are nurturing people around me.
T26: And when you feel safe enough, either in this relationship or with other people, then you can let yourself come out of the cave and let the scared part of you emerge.
C27: That's right. That's why, that's why I value the friendships with men and with other people. I don't care for the rest. Not to say that I don't need it, I do, but I need the friendship, and the safety and the security of that first. I, um, took a trip not too long ago and I met a man that I had known years and years ago, only very briefly. And I met him again I went out with him. And he was such a lovely person, such a kind person, and a very ... a very good person.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 57

Anyway, it was in the mountains and as I was driving home from his, um, his home, looking at the mountains, I, I had this feeling. It¡¯s kind of funny, I haven't read the Carlos Castaneda books, but I know the concept of the third eye. And I was feeling as I was driving through those mountains that, ¡°Now it¡¯s all right for my third eye to come out, and to be able to perceive.¡± And I felt so good. But when I came back home, I've kind of busied myself with woodworking, and the house, and that kind of thing. And I'm kind of back in the same environment, in the same predicament. But I know that I, I consciously at times choose between focusing in on things and not.
T27: I'm, I'm really interested in that experience, when you were away from him, then there was just a little while, when it felt safe. And you could perceive...
C28: When I was driving.
T28: Yeah, when you were driving and you could perceive yourself and the whole situation, I guess.
C29: I could perceive, it doesn¡¯t have much to, it did have to do with him, but I could perceive myself, and my closed-offedness. And at that time I was open, and I had that perception of myself and that awareness that I had been closed. And that, when I was driving through that canyon I was feeling very open and now I could have my understanding, and it was a1l right.
T29: You let yourself for that time come out of the cave.
C30: Yeah, yes, it was great. And then he came to see me. He flew in to see me a couple of weeks ago. And um, I felt, see I was aware I had this memory of that opening up and so I felt more guarded.
T30: Ah, is that right.
C31: But kind of slowly unpeeling layers, or slowing coming up.
T31: But somehow, having, having come out of the cave, you were afraid you might come out of the cave too easily.
C32: Too, yeah that's right, that's right.
T32: ¡°So, watch out, be careful¡±.
C33: That's right.
T33: You sound like a very tender, vulnerable part of you that lives in that cave. C34: I think my most tender part. (C cries)
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 58

T34: Your most?
C35: My most tender part.
T35: Your most tender part. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. It's really a very precious part of you that you keep in the cave
C36: (C takes long breath) I, for a long, long time, I¡¯ve had the feeling of hopelessness of ever coming out. And do you know life is an existence without all of you...
T36: Without?
C37: ...all of you.
T37: Yeah, I see.
C38: Right.
T38: So, you, the hopelessness, I gather is because you know you're not living with all of you. Part of you you're keeping well hidden.
C39: That's right.
T39: Well guarded. And it isn't really living, unless you can live it with all of you.
C40: That's right, it's just doing things, just doing things. The part that, you know, that I consciously avoid are the arts. The things that I love, music, theater, paintings, that kind of thing.
T40: Those are the things that touch your feelings.
C41: I don¡¯t get to the core.
T41: Ok, things that touch your feelings or touch the core of you, those you want to stay away from.
C42: That's right.
T42: They got, they get too close, too close to this very tender part of you.
C43: (Pause) I¡¯ve reached another stop.
T43: Uhm, hmm, but you felt safe enough to let out a little bit more and now it¡¯s come to another stop.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 59

C44: (Pause) I have to give equal time to all of my dimensions. We just have, I just felt, you know, in touch with my vulnerability, but now I¡¯m feeling angry.
T44: Ok.
C45: Like, ¡°It¡¯s none of your business...¡±
T45: Uhm, hmm.
C46: ...what I'm feeling.
T46: Uhm, hmm, what am I doing getting that close to the vulnerable part of you? ¡°Damn it, stay away.¡±
C47: That¡¯s right, that¡¯s right. What do you want to do that for? T47: Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
C48: You've got other things to do. (C laughs)
T48: So you¡¯re putting up all kinds of guards against me, and striking out, ¡°What the hell are you doing¡±, and, ¡°getting so close to the vulnerable part of me, why don¡¯t you go do something else¡±, hmm?
C49: That's the part that keeps me lonely.
T49: Uhm, hmm. So that, that pushing away part, that kind of angry, ¡°Get away from me¡± part, is what keeps you very lonely.
C50: It's like I don't really trust that I can trust you to know that. I can tell this and that. You may feel a little something about it, but what then? You know, I mean you know, ¡°It's a nice story, so, big deal, something else to do¡±.
T50: What I hear is that, is that you feel that I don¡¯t really care, just a story... C51: That's right.
T51: Just something... but what if I do ...
C52: You know...
T52: But what if I do care.
C53: (C takes a breath) I want to make a joke and say, "Aw, go on." (C laughs)
You know, um, I'm a nurse and, a psychiatric nurse, worked in a psychiatric hospital last year. One of the big things there, the patients got a lot of points if they would talk in group. I mean everybody wants you to talk. You know,
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 60

the good patient talks. And I thought, you know, anybody can talk. The reason why people don¡¯t talk is not because they can¡¯t talk, it¡¯s because they don't know how people are going to respond. That's where it¡¯s at. So I don¡¯t think the patients were not being good patients. I don't think they were being bad patients because they weren't talking. I think that the staff should have a demerit for not responding. Ok, these patients talked, now how do you respond? Makes it a whole new ballgame.
T53: Yeah.
C54: And so now, I talked. (C laughs) T54: You've earned some points.
C55: Yeah now I earned my points, that's true. But, um, I think that¡¯s the fear of everyone. It¡¯s not so much revealing themselves, but being cared about. That's my fear. That's my fears after I've revealed myself, ¡°Who cares?¡±
T55: It's uh, when you've let out a tender part of yourself, then it¡¯s damned important to know, ¡°Does this other person care? Does it make any difference?¡±
C56: My husband used to say he cared, but it was just words, it was words. He um, I think he cared as much as he could care but, he had so many conflicts inside of himself that he didn't even see me as a person. Didn't even see me. It's not that he didn't want to care. It's that he couldn't, he was too busy with himself. But I understand that. And I understand that with other people, too. But see I just can¡¯t go around revealing myself all the time to people who are just too busy with themselves.
T56: Uhm, hmm. You need a response, you need a caring, you need to make a difference to somebody.
C57: That's it, not to someone who¡¯ll say, "Oh, well, Kathy, I really care," and then I don't see them for a couple of years. Or, "I'll call you" and then they never call. You know, when I first split up from my husband, I would go to these different functions, not with a date, but with friends, and meet a man and he'd say, "I'll call you". And for a while there I'd be sure that I wasn't home, because I couldn't stand to know if he didn't call. And that way I didn't know if he didn't call, so there was a possibility that he had called. But I wasn't home, so how could I know. So with that, that, that vulnerable I was really in touch with it.
T57: It makes so much difference to you to know whether the other person is going to really respond. ¡°When they say they care, do they care?¡±
C58: That's right, caring people, will call you, or drop by, ¡°How's it going?¡±, that Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 61

kind of thing.
T58: And that's not enough?
C59: No, it would be enough, if they would do that. (C laughs) That'd be just great, that would be just great. I don't think I really want that much from another person. The morsels are fine, but I'm not even getting the morsels.
T59: Uhm, hmm, it isn't as though you want a whole meal, it's that...
C60: Yeah, I mean I could work up to it all right. That's why I think with this friend it was nice. And may have gone back in but I felt myself, come alive a little bit. A little bit of magic had come into my life, and that was nice. And I'd rather not come out all at once and run back in. I'd rather come out bit-by- bit and stay out. But see the thing of it is that, and like we're talking now, a little bit, or I'm thinking about the focus of the relationship, it has to be this male-female kind of thing. And, um, I don't think that what I need to do is to come out and have love, and then, think about a male-female relationship. But I don't know how I can come out too much without a man (C laughs).
T60: That's kind of a, contradiction, in a way. A dilemma, it's a dilemma. (T laughs) But you feel what you want first is a relationship with a person, only it helps if it¡¯s a man.
C61: That's right. It must be a man. Or...
T61: It isn't just better if it's a man, it's a necessity.
C62: It must be a man, that¡¯s right, because that's where my fear is.
T62: So that's where you fear is, a fear of a relationship with a man. And yet, you'd like to be able to really come out of the cave first, before it became a man- woman, sexual relationship, or anything like that. Is that what you're saying?
C63: I'd like to have a caring relationship. And its kind of funny, it's like a little girl wanting a man to take her out of the cave, and, care about. I'll put it back on me, I feel like a little girl. Someone to care about me and to know that I'm comfortable and that I'm all right, and then ask for himself.
T63: And then ask?
C64: For himself, of the relationship.
T64: But first, you'd like to have a man come at least to the entrance of the cave and take the hand of you as a little girl and lead you gently out, caring for you. Then maybe, other kinds of things might happen.
C65: (Pause) The little girl is the non-sexual, being. That's right, ¡°Don't use me Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 62

sexually first. And then if you like it good enough, keep coming back.¡± That's what I don't want.
T65: The little girl, the little girl will grow up if you care enough, for her. C66: That's right, and can respond as a woman, if the other is there.
T66: Can you tell him that? Could you tell him that?
C67: I'm confused, do I tell one man that, or is that what I...
T67: I was thinking of this, this one man. C68: Oh, this individual.
T68: Uhm, hmm.
C69: Oh, I think I could tell him that, I know I could. But you know, I start putting him down. (T laughs) I know that's just, my sister told me, she said, ¡°That's just because you're scared.¡± Because I told her the kind of man I would, I thought I would be comfortable with, and he is this kind of person. And then I start telling her all these bad things. And she said, "Nobody would be perfect. You would do this with anyone, some." But with this person I think I could.
T69: Maybe you could let him know what you need.
C70: I'd like to be able to carry that over. I suppose maybe, maybe I'm glossing that over or something, but I'd like to carry it over in my relationships with everyone. To get what I need from the relationship, and not focusing in on the other person. See, I think the way I am I'm the perfect nurse, the perf-, you know, anything for somebody else. And that's fine, focus in on them any time. But on myself, like I'm too scared to do that. Like that's a no-no. But I'd like to be able to do that, focus in on my own needs, first. But I feel kind of selfish when I look at it that way. I fee1 like a taker instead of a giver and that's got a negative, connotation.
T70: You're so much a nurse that when you even think of saying, ¡°But I need this for myself.¡± that seems kind of wrong, selfish.
C71: ¡°Wait a minute, you're the nurse. What is this?¡± T71: ¡°You're supposed to be caring for the other person.¡± C72: That's right.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 63

T72: But once in a while you realize, ¡°I'd like to care for myself, first.¡±([Pause) C73: Seems awful. (C laughs)
T73: Just to say that.
C74: ¡°You're so naughty, just thinking about it.¡± (C laughs)
T74: Just to say that, seems, ¡°What a selfish person I am.¡±
C75: Yeah.
T75: ¡°Terrible, awful.¡±
C76: I feel wicked, but I enjoy it. I'm enjoying thinking about it.
T76: It's fun just to imagine, ¡°I might want something for myself, first.¡±
C77: It's really a lovely fantasy to be completely narcissist, completely self- centered, and into pleasure, and into comfort. (C sighs)
T77: Just being good to yourself.
C78: But in a way, you know, in a way I am being good to myself by keep that vulnerable part of me away until it's safe. Because not everybody would be good to you, not everybody would be kind. There are people who would use you up, and not bat an eyelash, and not even think about it.
T78: So you have a real respect for your, for your instinct for preserving yourself. C79: That's right.
T79: You can't trust everyone, not everyone would care. (Pause)
C80: I was just smiling, I was thinking, but I care.
T80: And you say that with a smile, but that's pretty deep too isn't it?
C81: Uhm, hmm. I do care.
T81: ¡°I care for myself¡±.
C82: I like caring. I like it. I like caring for myself, and not giving away every part of my, just because some Tom, Dick, or Harry wants it.
T82: ¡°I really prize myself, and I'm proud of that. I'm not going to just give myself Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 64

away.¡±
C83: That's right. It's nice to have that feeling of caring for myself, that's good.
But you know since Dick died, I was thinking, I could die tomorrow. Any of us could, and, I'm missing, I want to have more. I don't want to just care for myself, I want to, I want to be able to care for myself and at the same time be able to take in life more. But I'm not doing, see I've closed it off, if I could figure out some way of doing that, then, you're smiling (C laughs), so that'd be just great.
T83: To be able to care for yourself, and yet open yourself up to life, and somehow that also tied up with the realization that, ¡°You know, death will come one day.¡± You'd like to live before you die.
C84: That's right, I want, I saw a card one time that said, ¡°Born, and then died.¡± And you open it up and it says, "In between, he lived" or something like that. That's what I would like for myself, a little life in between the born and the death, a little more life, and pleasure. See that's what I'm missing. Deep down inside is the, pleasure, experience of pleasure and joy, those kinds of experiences. I've been happy. I have fun. I do enjoy my children, but it's on a limited level.
T84: You don't really open yourself to joy. I guess fun, yes sure.
C85: But joy is on a deeper level, you see, so... I want to say, "But how've you been lately?" (C laughs).
T85: Well, ¡°Lets change the subject.¡± (T laughs).
C86: Yes, ¡°How's your wife, your house?¡± all that.
T86: Um, it'd be pretty nice to just, run away from some of this.
C87: It would, yes.
T87: Just talk.
C88: Well let¡¯s just have a rest for a while.
T88: I'm impressed with the fact that when you need a rest, you really take it.
C89: Oh, thank you. I was thinking my humor comes to the rescue, ¡°Give me a breather.¡±
T89: It's one of the ways in which you preserve yourself.
C90: That's right; I had a dream one time. And I dreamed that I was on a sled with two other girls, and we were going down a snowy hill. And we were going
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 65

too fast. And I told them to stop, they had to get off, otherwise they were going to crash into this train station at the bottom of the hill. And they wouldn't believe me. So I got off, and they went on. And I side-stepped in the snow all the way down the hill, but there were lots of trees where I was side stepping, and I was hanging onto the trees, one by one as I went down. And when I got to the bottom of the hill, the sled had crashed, or something. And then I thought to myself, ¡°That means, that has to do with me. Part of me would go too fast, and...¡±
T90: And, and this morning has been an example of the fact that you're not going to go so fast that you crash. (C: That's right.) You're going to go at your own pace if its step-by-step down the hill, oh, that's the pace you have.
C91: That must be it.
T91: Maybe that's a good stopping point. END
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 66

Rogers¡¯ Post-Session Commentary
I found it fascinating, the way in which this client very slowly lowers her defenses. I think those defenses could be broken through, but that in my estimation would not be as helpful as letting her proceed at her own pace. I think the client learns more that way. We did progress in the interview. We went from her perception of loneliness as her problem, to her fear of her relationships with men, to her feelings about letting the tender, vulnerable part of herself come out of a cave, to the recognition of the little girl in her that wants to be tenderly let out. She then began to get to the recognition of the deep, of the pain that is deep inside of her. That is unspeakable, almost unbearable. We saw her partially experience that pain, in spots, and then draw back. Then finally we saw the feelings that she has, that perhaps at bottom she is completely unlovable, one of the commonest feelings that people have. I thought that the dream at the end was almost a perfect description of the hour. She went deeper into herself, step-by-step, by slow degrees, cautiously and guardedly because she didn¡¯t want to crash into that pain. And she took resting times between the steps. So I thought that described the whole progress of the hour. I feel that it was a working interview, not highly dramatic, and much of therapy is work, and this was a good example of it. I felt present to her. I felt a companion in her exploration. If I were to continue to see her I think that she would gradua1ly move toward experiencing that care of herself of which she is quite frightened. I like the way we got into metaphors. Clients can say more in metaphors then they can say, than they dare to say openly. And I like the way I responded to the metaphors. I liked the way she was able to express her anger toward me whenever she felt it, whenever she felt that she was close to a dangerous part of her experiencing a painful part of her experiencing and that was easy for me to accept that anger. I felt good about this as a first interview.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy, Post-Session Commentary, page 67

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 Carl Rogers' First Session with Dione (Code name) Dialogue from the film, ¡°The Right to be Desperate.¡± 1977
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (Producer). (1977). Carl Rogers counsels an individual on
anger and hurt [Film]. American Personnel and Guidance Association (American Association for Counseling and Development).]
The film includes stopped images with Rogers¡¯ voice giving comments about the interview. All of the dialogue of the interaction between Rogers and ¡°Dione¡± is included. The voiced over sections do not censor any parts of the interaction. They are in brackets and italics.
T: C 1: T1:
C 2: T2: C 3:
Well, I'm really glad to meet you.
Okay.
I've heard a few things about you, all good things, and I've also heard that you have leukemia but that you're in a state of remission, and that¡¯s all I know about you . . . so from there on ...
Okay.
Whatever we do is up to us. What things do you feel you want to talk about today?
I don't know. I was sitting in the room and waiting, before, and I was thinking about when I was about 7 or 8 years old. I remember reading a book, I believe. And I can't recall the name, by Jung, I think it was. I recalled that when I was reading it, at that time, I used to go down in the basement of my home and um, turn off all the lights. And in a way, that was kind of closing the outside world out (C: Mhm, hmm) and concentrating on what I wanted to do and what I wanted to be. And at 7 years old I was into that, and today I'm in the same position . . . um, really at this, you know, trying to find out what I want to do, what I want to be. And um, I've learned a lot of things. I've learned a lot of things since I found out that I have leukemia (T: Mhm, hmm) which is about a year ago this June . . . and I've learned an awful lot of things.
I'll bet. And you're going through a stage if I understand is a little bit like what it was at seven, sort of shutting out the world or shutting yourself into a space where
T3:
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 68

you're trying to figure out what it is that you want or who you are?
[Rogers¡¯ voice over a stopped image Commentary 1: Clearly he has rehearsed this first portion and yet, the material is of interest. Whether it's superficial or deep, I want to understand the exact meaning his experience has for him. Whether it's true or false, real or imaginary, this kind of presenting material is very common in first sessions, and is to be expected and to be respected.]
C 4:
I think that I've listened for so long to other people about who I was (T: Mhm, hmm) and I remember in 2nd grade I was a potential credit to my race. That was one of the . . . (T: Mhm, hmm) I used to wonder why I couldn't be a credit to somebody (T: laughs) else's race also. I think I was really conditioned to be something. To be some kind of a symbol, or (T: Mhm, hmm) whatever, and not really being a person, you know, I kind of missed out on my childhood to an extent. (T: Mhm, hmm) I don't really regret it. I don't think I regret it anyway, but I've really been through a lot of changes. And I think that now, after finding out I had leukemia and after dealing with the leukemia in the way I did, it's just really incredible, you see. It was last June when I found out, and um, I proceeded to get everything in order because I was told that I had less than a year to live. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, that was the trip. (T: I'll bet.) That was a trip.
A trip into a fairly dark place, I suppose.
Oh, yeah. For sure. For sure. On one hand I accepted the death. I, you know, at my young age I think I've lived long and a great deal. But that was the start of some things that really has had an effect on me today. (T: Mhm, hmm) I'm much happier than I've ever been . . . today. (T: Hmm) I'm much happier. (T: Hmm) But there's a lot of hurt too. There's an awful lot of hurt and I think I'm just beginning to realize that. Um, because you know, in being a credit to your race, in being an outstanding student, an outstanding scholar, an outstanding football player, whatever; it leaves you little room to be . . .
T 4: C 5:
T 5: You've been meeting other people's expectations of you and it seems that that's what you should do now. I guess you're really questioning that very much.
C 6:
Oh, yeah. Tremendously. And like you get into . . . the fun thing about it is that I'm finding out that some of the things that I think inside of me are okay. And like that isn't . . . you know, I feel okay, and I'm in a process of becoming okay. But like I haven't worked it out. Hurt is a hard thing to deal with. And like conditioning yourself to die (T: Mhm, hmm) is another thing, you know, you see, I didn't let my family in on that (T: Hmm) until March of this year. So it was some months before I. . .
T 6: You carried that within you.
C 7: Oh, yeah. But I proceeded very meticulously to carry out a plan, where my children
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 69

T 7: C 8:
would live in an area that I wanted them to live. And that, I was trying to control something after I died. Only when I went back this year in March to celebrate my children's birthday, and I had four weeks, incidentally, to live at that time; I was told on March 15 that I had four weeks to live. And it was really incredible because like, for the first time, I saw all my relatives and my friends. And they were coming in and they were very loving, very loving people, and very kind, you see. Um, but at the same time, they were all throwing flowers on my grave. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I don't think they knew that. And as a result, I got worse and I got worse, and um, I took a friend back. You see, I'd lived out here in California. um, after I found out that I had leukemia, I proceeded to develop a plan to move my family out here. (T: Mhm, hmm) And we moved out in approximately November after several trips out in the area. The trips were basically to find a doctor (T: Mhm, hmm) and also find in a way some kind of a hope. You see, (T: Mhm, hmm) I have this conditioned thing about being a fighter. So, on one hand I accept that, (T: Mhm, hmm) and on the other hand I was trying to do all I damned well could to live.
If it's going to be death, okay, you'll take it. But you're not going to take it unnecessarily.
No. Not at all.
[Rogers Commentary 2: I like the way I'm being a companion to him, trying to discover just how the prospect of death seems to him. I find that important because a client needs most to be understood in the darkest portions of his experience.]
C 9: You know, the thing that uh, you know, after I was sitting in there and I was thinking . . . I had really conditioned myself to, to really get ready and find the nearest cross and crawl up on that, and I've been doing that since I was seven years old, and I'm not sure why.
T 9: To really crucify yourself, is that what you're saying? Or to be a martyr? I'm not really sure . . .
C 10: Oh, I'm not really sure. But I think the activities I was involved in, in terms of trans-racial communication, (T: Mhm, hmm) working with groups, and helping people (T: Mhm, hmm) I would hope very similar to what people like yourself did. (T: Mhm, hmm) Um, always being available for everybody, all the time. (T: Mhm, hmm) I think that's being a martyr or (T: Yeah) something. Yeah.
T 10: Putting the other person first.
C 11: For sure. Yeah. Instead of saying, "Hey, there's some time for me." Because you see, I worked so hard and so long that it was just really, really difficult for me to get used to, you know, being sick, not working' and not being in control (T: Mhm, hmm) because I definitely was not in control. (T: Mhm, hmm) And there were a lot of things that I did that I am not really very pleased about. (T: Mhm, hmm) But you
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 70

know, after thinking about it for just a little while, or whatever, one of the things I miss you know, I guess maybe from not telling people or whatever, about I was ill . . . but uh, after I told them, some months later, when I had four weeks to live, I didn¡¯t find anybody that allowed me to be desperate, that could understand some of the things that I didn't want to do. (T: Mhm, hmm) And that brought on another guilt trip. (T: Mhm, hmm) And so now I'm in the process of kind of washing all that stuff out.
T 11: Mhm, hmm. Is that part of the hurt? You referred earlier to hurt and I didn't quite understand that. (C: Mhm, hmm) I can understand the feeling of desperateness and also I can understand how hard it would be to have no one really understand that feeling in you.
[Rogers Commentary 3: I can let him feel desperate. Friends and family cannot allow this. It's important that someone can really permit it. I also go back to his earlier feeling of hurt, I wanted to get a more complete feeling for his inner world but he, as you will see, doesn't pick up on this particular portion.]
C 12: I've lost my father-in-law, which was a terrible loss to me, and it was a loss that I never could talk to my wife or anybody else about. (T: Hmm. Mhm, hmm) And I gave a lot to that family, you know, for five or, I don't know, seven years I guess. And when I went back, there were just some things that happened that they showed me there wasn't, there wasn't very much of a connection. There wasn't very much of a connection between, between all of that love and whatever that I put in, and then all of a sudden you know, I became just another uh, you know, I became just another black person. I became just another nigger. You know, and I think it's important to understand that my wife is you know, is white, German Irish. (T: Mhm, hmm. I see.) And I think that's a part of that whole thing. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) Um, when we first married, you know, my father-in-law, we just fought tooth and nail, but then after that we loved each other . . . for about six long, good, hard years. And basically, he was my only connection and when he died . . . I found that there was no support. (T: Mhm, hmm) There was absolutely no support.
T 12: And I, I imagine . . . or perhaps I catch a little bit of resentment, that you really poured a lot of love and caring into that family and had gotten some back from him, but after his death, none of it paid off for you in any way.
C 13: Right. For sure. Yeah, I think that, you know, what I wanted, what I wanted more than anything else, was just to you know, I guess, was love. I guess it was that mutualness, you know, what I felt for each of them. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, I thought that was not only my responsibility, but you know, it was very natural for me to care about people (T: Mhm, hmm) that were very close to my wife (T: Mhm, hmm) at that time.
T 13: So it hurt not to get that love back. It wasn't mutual.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 71

C 14: Oh yeah. For sure it did.
[Rogers Commentary 4: I always try to sense the feelings just below his words and he welcomes that. I try to catch the resentment and the hurt which he hasn't yet voiced very clearly.]
C 15: And there were various things that happened in terms of things that were happening back east . . . that people were wondering why I had left, you know, a good position and all that kind of garbage. And uh, because, see, I hadn't told anybody that I had leukemia. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, one thing led to another. And there were stories that needed, I think to um, I think every story, every situation needs to have two sides. (T: Mhm, hmm) And there was only one side and I was, I was hurt because I didn't have my chance.
T 15: You never were heard.
C 16: Never. And, but at the same time, like, in a way, in a way, I used to feel that I put myself in that position. Because no one knew what was happening inside of me, you see. Because I had to take care of myself. And I had to be better than everybody else. Because I was always told that. You can, in a majority society I had to be 100, 200 percent better than my white counterpart (T: Mhm, hmm) or my brown counterpart, (T: Mhm, hmm) or whatever. I had to do that, because that's what it took to survive .
T 16: Mhm, hmm. And in striving for that, one reason you really weren't heard was that you didn't dare express the person you were, the sick person you were at that time.
C 17: Oh, no. Not at - I really, I really had a fear of that. You know? (T: Mhm, hmm) I really, I guess, didn't trust some things that were happening, (T: Mhm, hmm) um, gee, at a whole global level, you know. But to, then to entrust that kind of information (T: Mhm, hmm) to other people. (T: Mhm, hmm) I was very uneasy about that. (T: Frightening) Very uneasy about that. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I did a lot of things that I didn't, didn't really want to do (T: Mhm, hmm) because I was very desperate. Um, I gave up my, my job and came out here, and I did consultant work and so forth, but I had to use a great deal of money for diagnosticians or (T: Mhm, hmm) whatever and, and, and all kinds of little gimmicks to keep me alive. (T: Mhm, hmm) And consequently I had to borrow money. And when I borrowed that money, I didn't borrow it in a way that would say to you like, "Hey, uh, Ted or whatever, I need, you know X amount of dollars, you know, and like . . . 'cause I've got, I have leukemia," and so forth. I'm scared to death to say that, you know? (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, I needed some money because of uh, I think I must have invented about ten stories, you know. And I think about it and you know, like, I felt real bad about that, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, because like I had developed a professional uh, attitude I think, about myself, or at least a kind of . . . I had a lot of respect from a lot of people. (T: Mhm, hmm) And you know, I really did have that . . . I don¡¯t know if that was love or caring or whatever, but it was
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 72

respect. (T: Yeah) When I got involved with money, the situation with money, I had to borrow money and I really couldn't tell. And in a way, you know, I really wanted to tell, but I hadn't even told my wife (T: Yeah) and my family. (T: Yeah) And I said, okay, well one thing, you know, and I'm gonna, I'm going to be okay, and this money is going to be here, and everything else like that and I think that's a part of, uh, me that I really, I'm not really sure, that ah, you know, is really acceptable you know, because I have to be perfect.
T 17: Yeah. Yeah. So, it's not acceptable even to you to do some of the things you did, and also I gather to live behind that facade of falsehood for quite awhile . . . not telling anybody what the score was.
C 18: Oh yeah. For sure. Very true. I . . .
[Rogers Commentary 5: The hurt and fear of revealing himself as ill is almost worse than
the illness]
C 19: That was very difficult. The most difficult part, I think, of (T: Mhm, hmm) I think it was the most difficult part of my illness. It was that, "Hey, I couldn't have cancer," you know. That's like having V.D. and three kinds of V.D. at the same time. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, how do you tell someone, "I have leukemia . . . I have less than a year to live, or whatever (T: Mhm, hmm) . . . and I need some money." (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, it's like when people you know, look at a drinking glass or whatever, and you know, after you told them you have cancer . . . and they make kind of a . . . shy away from your drinking glasses.
T 19: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. How could you possibly let anybody know where you were physically?
[Rogers Commentary 6: One of the hardest things for a dying person is the reaction that others have to him. So, when he's talking of death and dying, I feel it's highly important to be right with him; to recognize and accept his feelings.]
C 20: I really don't know. I really, you know, I've really tried to debate this thing in myself for a long time, and I really, I really don't know how I could have done anything any other way, because, you see, it was my character (T: Mhm, hmm) to not, I never . . . I'm always there to help other people. (T: Mhm, hmm) I wasn't there for . . . to say, "Hey, you know, I need some nourishment right now, whatever, you know."
T 20: You've just had no experience in being the needy person that needed help and needed . . .
C 21: Absolutely. Even when I needed money or whatever, I didn't need money (T: Yeah) because of my health. (T: Mhm, hmm) It was because of maybe bad business experience or an investment, or something or other . . . and like, for the
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 73

people who trusted that kind of information or whatever . . . like I, you know, well, I'm going to deal with that. I'm going to deal with that. But that's not in my character, it's never been in my character. (T: Mhm, hmm) I had to keep that image. (T: Mhm, hmm) I had to keep the image. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, it cost me my family, a couple children, you know. I guess that was the most important thing that it cost me. I think the other things are really not that important. But, but what it did do, what the leukemia did do . . . it helped me to, to understand that I'm just an ordinary human being like everybody else. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) You know, and sometimes you know, like, everybody has problems, and so forth, but at the same time it was like, it was my character to do that. You know, I wouldn't tell them. No. For what?
T 21: But it sounds as though the leukemia helped you to really destroy the notion of you as the "image."
C 22: I think, I think it did. I think it did. Finally, at the end it did. I use the end . . . the four weeks when I was told I had four weeks to live (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) that was the end, at the end of the leukemia. Even though I'm in remission now, (T: Mhm, hmm) I don't plan to, I don't . . . you see, I haven't told you that I went to, I went for the tests and gave enormous amounts of blood. I don't know where they were sending that blood or what they were doing with it. I gave an extraordinary amount, but nothing, nothing was coming of that. But you know, one of the things I did know that if I went to the hospital, if I did what the doctors said, I'd probably die. And it's almost like, you know, when you first become an agnostic in school, or whatever, you know, you go through . . . like I went through all this religious training, whatever. . . and I said, "I don't think that there's a God." Or, "that isn't really important, or whatever." (T: Mhm, hmm) But then at the same time, I hold back, you know. And every now and then I give an occasional prayer (T: Right) just in case.
T 22: Play it safe.
C 23: For sure. I think that's what I was also doing in terms of the leukemia. I really did. I had . . . the logical end to leukemia that my uncle and cousin had had before me was to die. (T: Mhm, hmm) Was to die. And now I think I know some things about that, though, that you don't have to die. Because it wasn't until I saw everybody throwing leaves and things on my grave that I really understood that I had the power to do that, and that, by lying for money, was probably worse for me than . . . than the leukemia, I think. (T: Hmm) I don¡¯t know if that makes any sense . . .
T 23: Yeah. It does.
C 24: Now I said it. (laughs)
T 24: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Somehow, what I get out of it is that being kind of false to yourself really was more of a burden to you, causes you more concern, than the
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 74

fact that you had leukemia. C 25: Oh, for sure. For sure.
[Rogers Commentary 7: I think this is the first time he voices a feeling that he has not realized before. That's a significant point in any first interview.]
C 26: The other thing was that I was about ready to leave my children, you know, very young, beautiful children . . . children that I'd brought into the world to do the same kind of, kind of thing that I was doing, you know . . . to take the world on their back (T: Mhm, hmm) and change things. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, and now that helped me now with my kids in the sense of I don't think I want to raise my children like that.
T 26: Mhm, hmm. You don't want them to carry the kind of burden and image that you carried.
C 27: No. Not at all. (T: Mhm, hmm) Not because they're part Indian. Not because they're part black. Or not because they're third world or whatever. They don't have to carry that burden of trying to change and always being the recipient of certain policies and things like that and always being controlled. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) And I never really, it made me feel apart . . . because I don't know if my second grade teacher thought they were doing me a favor by telling me I was a credit to my race, (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) but then . . . they certainly did, and I didn't feel good about it then. (T: Mhm, hmm) (Sigh) That's a start. (T: Mhm, hmm)
[Rogers Commentary 8: He has come to the end of his rehearsed part and now he is in new territory. I'm comfortable with the silence and I'm eager to see where he goes next. It's his choice.]
C 28: And I remember talking to a person when I came down. I'd just discovered I was in remission, and I was hobbling on a cane, and so forth, and God, the first thing I did down here was to take a motorcycle ride. Now, for me, that was radical. (T: Mhm, hmm) For me, that was extremely radical, but it was fun (T: Mhm, hmm) you know, and it was one of the first fun things that I did. (T: Mhm, hmm) Since I was ill, you know, because on top of having the leukemia I was fighting a divorce and having my property ripped away from me, you know, and having married into a family, and a family that was a different race than I was, and I learned later, as my wife told me that she didn't know that a whole community wanted to divorce. (T: Laughs) Like they were married. And I was hurt by that too. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) You know, how very good, (T: Mhm, hmm) Christian, (T: Mhm, hmm) upstanding people (T: Mhm, hmm) can make some pretty serious judgments without knowing you know, the whole story.
T 28: And I catch a note of bitterness there. A feeling that they really make judgments without, without knowing the picture.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 75

C 29: For sure. For sure. Well, the thing that was incredible was that I didn't . . . forgot about, I guess is that to understand, that you know, . . . I forgot for maybe a couple of years - Now, I'm going to oversimplify this next thing (T: Mhm, hmm) . . . but I forgot that I was black, (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) in that family, in that community, (T: Mhm, hmm) or whatever, you see. (T: Mhm, hmm) And then I quickly learned that I . . .
T 29: And then you were reminded all over again.
C 30: Oh, for sure. For sure. And I think that also caused a lot of bitterness or whatever. (R Mhm, hmm) And that kind of stuff I want to get out of me. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) You know, I can't deal with that . . . someone else's trip on me. Because I really don't hate anybody for that or whatever. A lot of the things I've brought on myself. But at the same time, I think I really do have the right at that time to have been desperate.
T 30: Yeah.
C 31: And I didn't really understand that.
[Rogers Commentary 9: This is a real step in self-acceptance: the acceptance of himself as a desperate person.]
C 32: It was just, you know, hey it was so bad, it got so bad . . . this whole trip of leukemia . . . and lying and things like that or whatever, that I don't know. I thought, "Well, if I can just get ahead a little bit, and make enough money to pay off all those people or whatever, or, and even in my will and with my insurance" (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) You know, I made sure that all of the people were going to be paid or whatever (T: Mhm, hmm) but, you know. I still wasn't, it still wasn't acceptable to me for some reason . . . I didn't want to go out owing anybody or (T: Mhm, hmm) whatever, because that wasn't, wouldn't be the American thing to do, I guess at that time.
T 32: That wouldn't be living up to the standards you've set for yourself and other people have set for you.
C 33: Oh. Yeah. For sure. And like, I'm a little tired of those standards. (T: Mhm, hmm) I'm really a little tired (T: Mhm, hmm) of those standards. And I basically think that the kind of things that um, . . . me and what I'm into, and what turns me on . . . is good for me. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I don't really know why I went into remission. You know, I have some feelings about that . . . you know, personal, religious, whatever. But I think a great part of that had something to do with deciding that I wanted to live.
T 33: Mhm, hmm. Perhaps, sounds as though you're saying several things here, that Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 76

perhaps deciding you wanted to live made a real difference. And also deciding that what you were experiencing as your needs and your wants and so on, really had some validity.
C 34: Yeah. It's really good to hear you say that. Because I really feel that. Because what I did I think was . . .
[Rogers Commentary 10: It is so good to feel understood. It's releasing. It shows the value of really getting inside the client's world and understanding it and communicating that understanding to the client.]
-
[Rogers Commentary 11: Little by little he is experiencing his bitterness, and his real desperation.]
C 37: My phone bill had to be about $1,500 a month you know, because I was so worried about (T: Mhm, hmm) the children, you know.
T 37: Mhm, hmm. So that was a big, heavy burden too, then huh?
C 38: Oh, yeah. Yeah, it really was pretty heavy. It was pretty heavy.
[Rogers Commentary 12: This is the first comfortable pause. I feel he is kind of catching up with himself and with the feelings he has voiced.]
End of Part 1 (End of first reel of the film)
T 38: Life has been a very fluctuating up and down, kind of
C 39: For sure. But the leukemia took me away from Michigan, which I have . . . oh, bless somebody for that. And if you know, I only live a couple of more months, or whatever, it's a lot better (T: Mhm, hmm) than living under uh, constant stress (T: Mhm, hmm) you know of worrying about not being accepted, or not being accepted.
T 39: But that's one good thing that the leukemia did for you.
C 40: Yeah. It really was. Because I got a divorce out of it. My goodness, I got to California. Um, and I really mean that.
[Rogers Commentary 13: Previously, the divorce was a hurt. Here it sounds more like a blessing. I wish to follow and be with each feeling as it arises no matter how ephemeral it may be.]
C 41: But even when I say it, you know, there's . . . it was a rough, scratchy, scratchy road . . . and you know, it's extremely difficult for me to talk about it now. (T:
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 77

Mhm, hmm) It really is .
[Rogers Commentary 14: Notice how his speech has slowed down. It shows he's working on himself. A client's whole speech pattern changes when he's exploring difficult new terrain.]
C 42: In getting all those bad things out, I'm not sure in terms of how to deal (T: Mhm, hmm) yet, or whatever. And I'm really not sure. But there are some you know, some things you know, like, I've really got to come to grips with it. "Well, finally," you know. Because they're still, you know, when I talk to my wife from 3,000 miles away and she tells me about what her mother thinks and all sorts of other things, or whatever, I get sick. It happened yeah . . . it happened the other day. She called and everything was really great and then she'd begin to talk about a lot of other people, and what their attitudes and what their opinions was. That night I got very little sleep and was ready to go back to the hospital and was ready to have leukemia too. (T: Mhm, hmm) I was ready. You know?
T 42: So you feel as though in some sense you prepare the readiness for the illness, or you, are taking in something from outside; it makes you ready to have it.
C 43: It seems like it. You know, I didn't believe that. I didn't believe that statement that you just made, some time ago, (T: Mhm, hmm) but I believe it now. (T: Mhm, hmm) I believe it.
[Rogers Commentary 15: A fascinating awareness of the psychological source of his symptoms.]
C 44: You know, I recall when I went back, and, and, and um, for the first time, my parents had learned that I had leukemia. You know, what do you say to your mother? What do you say to your father? I remember I got a phone call. And I was staying at my wife's house where we were going, keep in mind now, we were going through a divorce, the whole bit, and were, uh celebrating my children's birthday at the same time. My mother calls. "We're coming over." Nobody at the house. All of a sudden I lose my . . . my vision goes. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, that was one of the symptoms (T: Mhm, hmm) of leukemia. And uh, and, it scare-, it scared the hell out of me (T: Mhm, hmm) like I really wanted to run. But I couldn't run, I couldn't see. (T: Couldn't see.) And um, it was only when I got back to California that I tried to put that together, you know (T: Mhm, hmm) of what happened when (T: Mhm, hmm) in terms of you know, the paralysis that I had in terms of my legs. It's incredible, it really seemed like somehow, somehow I've got control of that, in some way but I mean I'm not really sure. But I'm convinced that I have control. (T: Mhm, hmm) But I'm not sure how. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know. (T: Mhm, hmm)
T 44: I gather you feel that where before these things happened to you because of what happened to you from the outside, now you are beginning to feel control over it yourself . . . from the inside. Is that, is that part of what you're saying?
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 78

C 45: I think that's what I'm saying.
[Rogers Commentary 16: This raises the whole question of what is illness? In what sense is it psychological and what sense is it physical? I can only go with the psychological reality as he presents it to me.]
C 46: When I'm positive and when I¡¯m doing things that I enjoy, I don't have symptoms (T: Mhm, hmm) anymore. (T: Mhm, hmm) I don't have symptoms. And I don't you know, like, when I came down here, the doctors wanted me to have transfusions and things like that, you know, and I remember one doctor saying to me, "I don't know really who's got you into playing this tennis and all that, or whatever, but you really need to come in here and have a transfusion." I said, "For what? I'm doing okay." "To be on the safe side." You know? (T: Mhm, hmm) That's . . . well, I won't say what that is. (Rogers laughs) But, you know, like, to some extent though, that confirms some things to me about not trusting doctors to take care of myself. (T: Mhm, hmm) I'm talking about the leukemia. (T: Yeah) I'm certainly not trying to indict all doctors or the medical profession (T: Sure) by what happened to me, (T: Mhm, hmm) you know, I think, I hope, in some way that other people who have life-threatening illnesses can deal with it because I think I have, and I do have that control. And like, since I was 7, to some extent, when I went down in that basement and turned that light off, or whatever, and I shut the outside world off . . . or whatever, somehow I've lost that . . . because somehow in the process of becoming educated and socialized, and whatever, (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) I let other people control what I wanted and what I wanted to do. And I really . . . I did. That was a . . . Jesus, that was a, yeah, well, okay.
T 46: That has a lot of meaning to me, and I want to make sure I'm getting it straight. Down in that basement as a 7-year old with the lights out . . . you were really finding yourself and, I gather, trusting yourself. (C: Mhm, hmm) And then life was, said to you, "No, no, don't do that. We have the standards for you. Live up to our expectations. You've got to be the image. You've got to be just right. And everything." And now you are gradually recapturing what you felt as a 7-year old.
C 47: I believe that to be true. Because even though that you know, the responsibility, you know, it was like something inside of me could touch something that wasn't seen . . . when I was seven. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) And I can't remember what the book was that Young wrote, or whatever. (T: Mhm, hmm) But it had an extraordinary effect on me, this seven- year-old, you know? (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, I started writing poetry. My first poem. But I guess I did lose it. I did lose it. Like I still had it, but all this garbage about me being . . .
T 47: It was well buried?
C 48: Yeah. Yeah. And then other people were shaping me up by saying, well, you know, "You're really good if you do it this way, or whatever."
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 79

T 48: "You're a credit to your race."
C 49: Oh, yeah. "You're extraordinary. You're a credit to your race." You know, and, I don't know. Maybe they meant very well, or whatever, but it didn't do the job. It didn't do the job, you know, because in a way, by accepting that kind of praise, and their kind of . . . buying into their kind of system, or whatever, like, I gave up something that I knew already at 7 years old.
T 49: And that something, as I get it, is you were giving up something of yourself. C 50: Yeah. I've . . . sounds good. Yeah, I did. I did.
[Rogers Commentary 17: This really touches him. He¡¯s letting it sink in. He's experiencing his loss of self. This is the very heart of therapy. When I can provide a climate in which the client can experience his buried feelings rather than describe them or be told about them, it has a much more powerful and enduring effect.]
C 51: You know, maybe I'd have been better off if I'd just gone on and lived my life rather than try to live other people's lives or whatever, you know. But I gave up being happy myself. You know, I didn't expect you know, I guess I didn't expect myself to be happy, or to really maybe deserve happiness, or something.
T 51: Sounds like you wanted so much to help people, that ah helping yourself didn't fit into that picture at all.
C 52: Not at all. Not at all. There was enough to do without worrying about your own (T: Mhm, hmm) little problems and things like that (T: Mhm, hmm) at that time, so I said to myself then, you know? Oh, yeah. A lot of things are racing through my mind as we talk and, but there are certain things that go through this whole thing that I pick out in terms of when I was seven, and those are just really important times for me, you know. They were important times in terms of when I was alone, and when I was sure, and when I felt good and I felt a part of the you know, the stars, the universe. I really did feel that. You know, I remember I used to go out when I was 7, 8, 9 years old . . . three or four o'clock in the morning, look up in that beautiful sky and see those stars (T: Mhm, hmm) or whatever, (T: Mhm, hmm) and I'd say, "That's mine over there and I'm going to be there." And I felt good. I felt I don't know, in a sense integrated, more integrated than after . . . and as I continued (T: Mhm, hmm) to do this and fill out the forms for a scholarship, or things like that, I lost it. I really lost it.
T 52: At seven, you were really a part of the universe and you knew it.
C 53: That's what I thought. But you know, what does a 7 year old know, you know, I don't know.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 80

[Rogers Commentary 18: This has been a marvelous picture of the wholeness of the child and it's description by society. I'm trying as in all my therapy to help him get back to the kind of realness he had as a child.]
C 54: I think I did. Yes, I knew it. I knew it because I knew, because I was always drawn to the stars, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm) It wasn't anything like my parents would wake me up in the middle of the night, or whatever, I woke up; I don't know why.
T 54: It was something that you wanted to do. It was something you had a view. Not because somebody else said, "Hey you should be interested in the stars or something like that."
C 55: For sure. For sure. And I was, I think at that time I was really the best person that I could be. And you know, I guess, for some reason, I don't want to heap it on everybody else you know, but I was just taught, conditioned or something that . . . to not trust that anymore. (T: Mhm, hmm) To . . . you know. (T: Uh, huh) It's like those things when you're young you hold onto or whatever.
T 55: "But then, that's just childish. That's just . . . "
C 56: Right. Right. Yeah.
T 56: "Don't trust that stuff." (C: Mhm, hmm) "They're telling you what's right." (C: Yeah.)
C 57: Yeah, yeah. I've really suppressed . . . I guess a hell of a lot of anger. 'Cause you know, when you said that, you know, I felt you know, like . . . you know, I think of all kind of words now.
[Rogers Commentary 19: Speaking in society's voice when I said, "Oh that's just childishness, they're telling you what is right." There's something intuitive on my part but it released his anger. I like to follow my intuition and I've learned to trust it.]
C 58: Really for sure. You¡¯re a minority . . . and in terms of a minority within a minority within a minority. Like mother's Osage. She's part Indian, (T: Mhm, hmm) her family . . . that history. (T: Mhm, hmm) Father a descendant of black slaves. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know? And then being picked out, you know? (T: Mhm, hmm) Because that's what it was, you know, 'cause I knew what was happening to other people in the class, whether they were white or black or whatever. But it was . . . you know, but I always really understood that I had to be 200 percent better than everybody else so I'd achieve. I almost killed myself playing football because I wanted to be the littlest superstar, whatever that means. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) It's crazy things. You know, it was that competitiveness, or whatever, you know. And it was that I wouldn't have anything if I didn't compete and if I didn't do it like, you know, somebody else told me to do. (T: Mhm, hmm) I guess.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 81

T 58: So those standards and what they did to you really, really dominated your life, if I get it right.
C 59: I think so. I really think so. I, I uh, my reference point became . . . and I guess I bought into that. You know, I really bought into that. And I really, it really seems foreign to me now. It seems as foreign, I think, as leukemia, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know I've . . . it really does, you know.
T 59: Yeah. One way of putting it is I feel you are saying, "Damn it, that seven year old was more right than all that's gone on in between."
C 60: Yeah. Yeah. And maybe trying to get back to that, and whatever, and now and uh, you know, I just wonder how, how that person at 7 would have been dealing with the leukemia and all those other problems now. (T: Mhm, hmm) It would have been interesting, I think. Probably would've handled it much better. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) (Pause 7 seconds) (Laughs) Feel some kind of release. I don't know.
[Rogers Commentary 20: Notice how his voice has slowed, become more thoughtful and calm. He's getting closer to himself by revealing some of himself. And it feels good.]
C 61: I told a lot of people you know, about um, about me. You know, and something that came out you know, and that other part of me may be . . . I'm really wondering about trusting too, right now. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know (T: Mhm, hmm) 'cause I've trusted a lot of other people, too. (T: Mhm, hmm)
T 61: And so you're wondering, "Yeah, but can I trust him?"
C 62: Hmm. Well . . .
T 62: Maybe part of that reason is you feel, "My God, I've told him a lot. I've trusted him. Have I trusted him too much?"
C 63: Sure. Well, I guess I'm just going to have to deal with it in terms of do I trust myself to tell you. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, but I do have that, you know. I have that history. (Laughs)
[Rogers Commentary 21: Is it safe to trust me with this more vulnerable part of himself? Clients often have such doubts and I respond in a way which helps him to realize that I recognize and accept that question.]
C 64: You know, . . . but I've really been you know, like a lot of other people, like a lot of other people, you know, or whatever. But I've learned so many things from this, this whole thing, or whatever, you know. And even just sitting here and talking with you, whether you're Carl Rogers or Jesus Christ or whatever, you know . . .
T 64: Or Joe Doakes.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 82

C 65: Or whomever, you know, it's a, still it's a very difficult thing for me to . . .
T 65: Yeah. Yeah.
C 66: And I don't know if I just haven't allowed myself to be open, you know, and to be needy or whatever. But is that junk? That "credit to . . ." You know, that really makes me mad. That really made me mad. I mean, I keep, in mind as I'm talking, it keeps coming back to me, you know. "Credit to my race, to my race." I remember that teacher so well, with big boobs, and she put my head right in them and said I was a credit to her race. And you know, that . . . oh, that burned me up.
T 66: So as you get deeper into that feeling it isn't just that you, earlier, you said you wondered if it was wise of her to do that. Now you know, "Damn it, I'm really angry at her for doing that to me."
C 67: Yeah. And I'm even more angrier when I see it happening all the time. And I don't want it to happen to my kids. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I didn't really want my kids to be a credit to their race. You know? (T: Mhm, hmm) And I know that now. Getting militant. (Laughter)(Pause 6 seconds)(Sigh)
[Rogers Commentary 22: He finds it very hard to experience his anger. He only talks about it rather coolly. The sigh though, is one of real letting down. A relaxing, a trusting. We really are in relationship.]
T 67: Our time's about up and I don't know if there¡¯s more you want to say now for today, okay. Or if not, we can call it quits for today.
C 68: Well I'd like to be able to tell you something.
T 68: All right.
C 69: That is going to make me feel good. That is going to continue to have me feel positive about myself and to grow and to be nourished or whatever, but I'm really not sure what to say. You know, but I really want to do that, so that I can continue to live, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) That's important to me, and so (T: Mhm, hmm) um, but it's just not coming. But I think I really want to say that and be comfortable in saying, you know, "I got raked over the coals and I resent it and I'm mad and I'm angry and I need to get that to be angry (T: Okay) You know. (T: Mhm, hmm)
T 69: "Okay. I was really screwed by a lot of people, and I have reason to be angry, and I am angry, and I need to say that." I can hear the anger in there.
C 70: Yeah. But you know how I haven't said it yet, though, you know. I really haven't. You know, I think it um, I think it's just a part of being civilized maybe.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 83

T 70: Mhm, hmm. You're talking about it in a very civilized fashion. (C: Right) Living up to those standards.
C 71: Yeah. Which I'd like to just go back and kick some butts, I think. (Sigh) Well, enough of the militancy.
T 71: Okay? Shall we call it quits for today? C 72: Yeah. I think so.
T 72: Alright good. See you tomorrow.
[Rogers Commentary 23: He has revealed more of himself than he expected to. He's going from a presentation of himself to exploring himself. From talking politely to talking honestly about anger. I believe this has happened because I've followed every feeling I could even when he seems to be scattered, to be talking about several different things, I've tried to stay with and respond to the most central of his feelings. I feel like we've made a start. On a more intellectual level, this session provides dramatic evidence of the theory that the child is open to all experiencing. That he or she feels the locus of evaluation is in the self. Then the family, the educational system and the culture pound home the lesson, "Don't believe in your own experience but learn to live by others' expectations. Then you'll be rewarded by love." Therapy means slowly discarding those introjections and gradually recapturing the person as he was in his childhood.]
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 84

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 Carl Rogers Counsels an Individual on Anger and Hurt (Film) (Code name-Dione) Second Interview -- 1977
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (Producer). (1977). Carl Rogers counsels an individual on anger and hurt [Film]. American Personnel and Guidance Association.]
[Rogers: This is the second interview with a young man who reports he has leukemia, but is in a state of remission. In his first interview he realized that the self he had at age 7, was a very precious self and that social expectations caused him to lose it. He had also approached the feelings of anger he has felt about what has been done to this self and to him. But he has not yet expressed his anger. Now the second sessions begins.]
T1: O.K. Where do you want to start this morning?
C2: Uh, I don't know. I wa ... I was thinking that when we ... when we talked earlier about the, the anger ... (T: Mmm.) I've been thinking a great deal about that.
T2: I've thought a lot about what you had to say about that.
C3: Right, you know, and I'm not sure that, uh, that I really don't want to be angry, you know, and I'm not sure if anger ... being angry now, is a part of the process and I've got to do that, but I'd like to ... I guess my uh ... I guess my mind uh academically or something, you know, and something other than emotion or whatever, like, would like to tell me that, uh, I'd like to uh ... to not be angry and to skip over that part, if that's a part of the process, you know? But I'm not sure I can do that (small laugh), you know.
T3: Your mind says sort of, "Oh, cool it. Don't ... don't get into uh, such strong emo- tion".
C4: For sure. It almost seems like that ... that uh whatever is happening in my environment or whatever happened in my environment is pulling me into again uh, that kind of a trap ... that kind of a system that I don't particularly care ... er, er, you know, if you know what I mean.
T4: Mmm. I think I get that: that your ... your mind is taking the place of the system in saying now, uh, "Play it right. Do the right ... do the proper thing".
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 85

C5: Right.
T5: But some other part of you is saying, "Yeah, but there's some anger there". C6: For sure. For sure.
T6: There's some real anger there.
C7: Right. It's ... it's almost like in this country ... and, and I've always felt like this ... you only have about two options, you know, when you deal with race ... you either have to be ... you're either a racist or you're an anti-racist. (T: Mmm.) And that doesn't really seem to be the kind of thing that I'm, you know .... I don't really care to be an anti-racist, if you know what I mean (T: Mmm.) anymore. Uh, and I don't wanna be a reflection of any other ... of any other larger society at all. (T: Mmm.) I really don't want to ...
T7: You'd like to get in touch with what's going on in you. C8: For sure.
T8: Not ... not some label or other.
C9: For sure. I think that I could probably trust that a lot better than, than, than trusting what's happening or what has happened. (T: Mmm.) And, um, and when I think about that ... when I think about all of that, you know, uh, the things that we talked about ... I, I, I think that, um, that's worse than the leukemia.
T9: Uh, uh-huh.
C10: You know? I know that may sound very strange or whatever, but a lot of things have been strange
T10: Mmm. Mmm.
C11: You know, since this time; and, and what has happened to me didn't just start when I found out that I, you know, was going to die. (T: Mmm.) Kind of thing.
T11: Let me see if I understand that. That you feel as though, um, what the culture and people and so on have ... have done to you ... that's really caused you more suffering than the leukemia. Is that what you're saying?
C12: I think so. (T: Mmm.) I think so. And to some extent that ... that would ... that is mild ... like, for instance, you know, you ... I don't know what would have happened if I had died or if I will or whatever, but I certainly know what's happening now and what happened.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 86

T12: Mmm. C13: You see. T13: Mmm.
C14: And to some extent that ... that kind of leukemia, that kind of deterioration of the body is the same kind of thing that happened to my mind. (T: Mmm.) And um ... (T: Mmm.) You know, it¡¯s ...
T14: So really, what the culture did to you was give you a cancer of the mind.
C15: Yeah. I, I, I, I really ... I think, I really want to say that and I really want to, um, and I believe it, you know, and I guess that part of me that's, that's my culture or is a part of the total, ... is saying that it's not all that good to be angry, you know, because militancy is frowned upon or whatever, you know. (T: Mmm, mmm, mmm.) And I guess I'm using mili- militant in my sense because of ... it's, it's just traditionally, you know, when blacks become angry they're, they're not angry ... they're militant. (T: Mmm.) You know what I mean (slight laughter)?
T15: I know. Another label.
C16: Mmm. For sure, for sure, for sure. Yeah. And I ... and there's nobody that I can put my finger on, you know ... that person that started the whole thing ... that process, you know, because that would probably be a lot better for me, you know, then I probably would, would try to, to do ... to do that person in.
T16: Yeah ... If you could ... (C: You know?) If you could pin it on one person, then your rage would be justified and you could really get after that person.
C17: Mmm. But how, you know ... but how do you blame somebody else who's sick? (T: Mmm.) You know? And I think that people that do that to other people, or at least - when it was done to me, um ... they're really sick, you know. And here I am, you know, trying to ... you know, I don't know if it was forgiving, I don't know if I'm sounding confused or whatever, maybe, you know, but trying to accept their sickness, you know.
T17: Mmm.
C18: And at the same time, you know, I really haven't had the opportunity of letting anybody accept mine.
T18: Mmm.
C19: OrmaybeIhaven'tgivenittothem,but...
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 87

T19: Yeah, maybe you haven't given it to them.
C20: Right.
T20: That's what I sense is going on now ... that you feel "there's so many reasons why I really shouldn't express my anger. I'll, I'll talk about all those reasons".
C21: Yeah (small laugh), for sure. I don't know really, you know. Maybe I'll just be angry one day (small laugh) and maybe I'll really feel better or whatever, you know, and, and I ... when I, when I smile, I ... I'm uh, you know, I'm smiling but there¡¯s a lot of ... and I'm sure you know that ... there's a lot of anger there. (T: Mmm.) You know, but it's not my nature to be angry (T: Mmm.) It's not my nature to be angry, but I feel angry.
T21: Yeah. Um, and uh so I hear you explaining and explaining that uh, uh, "that's not my nature to be angry. It's just that I am angry right now".
C22: For sure (slight laugh), for sure. And to try to be angry in a productive ... I don't know how you'd be angry in a productive way ... you know, in terms of ... It's like now when I ... when I respond to people, you know ... if, if when you encounter people, you know, whether it's in the street, whether it's in a professional situation or whatever, you know ...if people send out certain messages and wh ... no matter what they're saying or whatever ... there are certain kinds of messages that I'm getting, you know. They're saying that, "hey, you know ... that isn't for me" kind of thing, you know. And that's before, you know, I'd like to work with that, and ride it ... like to try to communicate without alienating ... (T: Mmm.) people or whatever, but now, you know, I'm ending up saying, you know, like ..."hey, that's a bunch of crap", (T: Mmm.) you know. "Don't ... don't, don't tell me about the way that I should do it or, or give me all that nonverbal stuff about, um, you saying that I'm OK, but by nonver- bally saying ... "hey", you know, "you're really not OK", you know. And I don't want to hear that kind of stuff anymore.
T22: I get what you're saying and I also feel quite strongly that I want to say, "it's OK with me if you're angry here"...
C23: (Pause) ... But I don't, you know ... it's hard to know how to be angry, you know ... hard to ...
T23: Sure, sure, I'm not saying you have to be. (C: Sure). I'm just saying it's OK with me. C24 Mmm.
T24: If you feel like being angry, you can be angry.
C25: Youreallybelievethat?
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 88

T25: Damn right.
C26: (12 second pause.) Well. (15 second pause.) (Sigh.) I'm not sure how to respond to that at all, you know, because a part of that anger is, you know, the ... the hurt, and maybe if I¡¯m... maybe what's happening is that if I'm ... if I become angry and I really let it hang out, that I really will see how hurt I am.
T26: Mmm, mmm.
C27: Andum,youknow,thatjustcametomeasyouweretalking.
T27: Mmm, mmm.
C28: That,youknow...
T28: Perhaps at a deeper level you're afraid of the hurt that you may experience if you let yourself experience the anger.
C29: Forsure. T29: Mmm. C30: Really. T30: Mmm.
C31: (Small laugh. Pause.) Um, whew ... (Pause.) I keep getting these blocks, you know ... these, you know ... when I come to something like that, you know, because, you know, to me that's a revelation and I'm not really sure that, uh, risking being angry I guess ... (T: Mmm.) or something like that, you know.
T31: Mmm.
C32: Losingcontrol,maybe.
T32: Yeah, mmm.
C33: You know? (Pause.) Well ... (takes a drink of water).
T33: I really do get that ... that this ... this realization that, "Maybe what I'm most afraid of is the hurt that I might experience", um, makes you more cautious about whether you should, whether you should or could really let go of the ... of the anger.
C34: Ireallydon'tknow,Ithinkthat...
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 89

T34: It's a risk.
C35: Right. And it's, you know ... I hadn't really thought about that before.
T35: Mmm. It's new.
C36: Yeah. It's, uh ... I guess I would be ... and I'd re-really would admit openly that I'm hurt. I, I said that I've been hurt.
T36: Mmm.
C37: And I think, you know, that I, I feel I've been hurt, but to really ... to show that, you know ...
T37: To show it and ... I guess to let yourself sort of ... experience it, that ... that, I guess would be difficult.
C38: Yeah, I, I don't know. It ... it's, it, it's as scary, I think, as the possibility of ... that I had before ... more than before, about dying, you know.
T38: Mmm. Mmm.
C39: And maybe, you know ... guess I was really scared because of the symptoms, you know, of, of, you know ... not being able to walk and not being able to see, and things like that, you know. And having to depend on somebody, you know. And for God's sake, you know ... having to show somebody that I'm ... that I'm hurt.(T: Mmm.) And how, you know, how can I trust that to somebody, (T: Mmm) you know. Umm ...
T39: Seems like a horribly big risk.
C40: Yeah, it is (small laugh). Seems to be getting bigger and bigger as we talk!
T40: Mmm, mmm, mmm. "Suppose I really expose to somebody the fact that I'm deeply, deeply hurt". That in a sense would be comparable to having to be dependent on someone when you can't walk or something like that.
C41: (Smiles and sighs.) Right. (Pause.) Yeah. I'd like to just to say it's my ... it¡¯s trying my conditioning. I try not to ... one way out of it ... and, uh (laughs) ... But that ... that isn't really acceptable to me now because I ... I, I, I, I feel that I ... I feel like ... that I have to express that, that hurt or whatever, but you know, I can say that, you know, and I know right down here, you know, I'm ... I'm saying that and when I say it, you know, it kind of keeps something down here. (Gestures, hand to chest, palm down. Laughs.), you know.
T41: Mmm. You're saying it from here up. (Gestures, hand at chest, palm down). Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 90

C42: For sure. For sure (small laugh). I don't know how to do that exactly ... whatever ... It's like I don't drink a lot, you know, because I don't really want to, uh ... (T: Mmm.) ... experience that kind of, uh, you know ... alcohol to me is a depressant anyway, and um, you know ... that's about the only thing I really like to get out ... to really get out, you know, and maybe saying, you know, like I'll love somebody. "I gave of myself". I did the ... hell ... the best I could, and it wasn't good enough, you know, and you know, demand on top of demand and everything like that, you know ... It's just, you know ... Shit ... you know, it's, it's like that I'd like to be able uhh ... and I said this here, the other day or when I was talking to you ... that I'd like to be able to, to say that ... yeah, "I was screwed over and I got hurt and everything else", like that, or whatever, but it's an ... it's almost an admission in a, in a way on another level of, of ... of saying that they got the best of me, you know.
T42: Mmm, mmm, mmm.
C43: AndIreallydon'want...
T43: Mmm.
C44: You know, I really don't want anybody historically to get, have ... to have gotten the best of me ... but they did. They did. They beat the hell out of me.
T44: You don't want to say, "I really was defeated at times", and yet that's the truth.
C45: Mmm. It is. (Sighs.) (Pause.) You know, being ... having it being all right to be defeated and be beaten and I don't know if there's any value in, you know ... maybe to myself ... admitting it to myself, or whatever, you know, but you know, I ... I'm really finding out I got a lot of (laughs), hangups in terms of, in that line that I hadn't thought of before, you know ... in terms of, you know, because I don't want to be beaten. (T: Mmm.) But I was, you know.
T45: Mmm.
C46: BecauseIthinkwhenyouarehurt,that'sbeingbeatenexcept,youknow... T46: Mmm, mmm.
C47: And I allowed myself to, and I don't regret caring, and I don't regret loving or whatever, but you know ... like I'm a ... I'm a kid, you know, I'm a kid in a way. I like to be loved too; I like to be uh ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) ... some reciprocity. And I'm going to start, I think, expecting that. You know ... without being cold or anything like that. (T: Mmm.) But I have to, you know, start getting something back in return.
T47: You want love to be mutual.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 91

C48: For sure, for sure. (T: Mmm,hmm.) And I don't want to have, uh get in the situation like I'm in now, you know, where I'm afraid to, to, to, show anybody that I am, I'm hurt, you know. (T: Mmm,mmm.) Scared to death ... terrified.
T48: Something really awful about showing ... letting anyone know that "I'm hurt". (C: Yeah.) "I'm hurting".
C49: Sure, sure. It's, you know ... it has something to do with being a man and it has something to do with ... with the race thing, you know.
T49: Mmm.
C50: Ithassomethingtodowiththerelationship...
T50: Mmm.
C51: Maybe the failure of a relationship, uh. A ... a lot of things, you know ... a father not being in the home with his children.
T51: Mmm.
C52: (Pause.) You know, I really feel like being a victim. T52: Mmm.
C53: (18 seconds pause. Smiles, takes a drink of water.) I don't know how to get that up at all. (Small laugh.) Every time I get close to that, I take a drink of water! (Laughs.) (T: Laughs.) Uh, I don't know if that acts to keep it down there or what.
T53: Maybe ... maybe, maybe that'll keep it from coming up above this level (gestures).
C54: For sure. I, I don't know. See, how it, it really isn't what I want either. You know, I want it to get out and stay out, you know.
T54: "I would like to let it out".
C55: Yeah. So maybe if you have any (sigh) exorcism type powers or whatever, (T: slight laugh.) that, uh ... maybe you can just do that and then I'll be free of that, you know. Because that's what it feels like ... it feels like there's something there, you know, that I really ... and I've identified it. I think I've identified it, you know, because I know there're some times when there¡¯s such a big lump in my throat, you know, and that I explain, I give myself a lot of reasons why I shouldn't be feeling like that, you know.
T55: A big lump of hurt, though. (C: Mmmm.) (15 second pause.) And how to let that hurt come out in the open ... how to let it ... emerge and be out here instead of way down
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 92

locked in here.
C56: Right. (Small laugh.) Yeah. You know, I, I, I never believe in cookbook answers to anything, even when I cook I don't use a cookbook. I just don't believe in it. I think, but I'd really like to be able for somebody to tell me (T: Mmm) to, you know, maybe how to do that in about five minutes (T: Mmm) and be through with it so I can live the rest of my life in peace. (T: laughs.) You know what I mean?
T56: (Laughs.) Sure. It'd be awfully nice if somebody could say, "Now, if you do this and this, all your hurt will come out and it will be gone forever".
C57: For sure.
T57: Be great, wouldn't it?
C58: For sure. (Laughs.) I have a suspicion that maybe you know some things that I don't know. (Laughs.)
T58: (Laughs.) No.
C59: Mmm.
T59: No, I'm not holding out on you.
C60: Hey, I, I believe that. I, I ... it feels like I'm holding out on myself ... (T: Mmm.) You know. But hell, you know. I don't know.
T60: I think it goes back to some of the things you mentioned. A man doesn't admit he's hurt ... a black man especially doesn't admit that he's been hurt by anything. (C: Sure.) Uh, a father doesn't admit he's been hurt by being away from his children. Just too many things that say: no, no, no ... don't let it out. (Pause.) But inside there's the hurt.
C61: Yeah.
T61: A phrase came to me a minute ago that, ¡°If you could let that out, ...¡± I don't know whether this will ring true to you or not ... ¡°If you could let that out, it would be the Voice of a Victim.¡± I don't know if that makes any sense or not.
C62: Mmm, yeah. And I don't know what, you know, I don't know if I have any control over that, (T: Mmm.) you know, of what, of what ... of what would happen, you know. It's like a friend of mine the other day, who helped me through my illness and everything, he says, you know, when I've encountered another person that, you know, a very intelligent sort that was talking a bunch of intellectual garbage about feelings and things like that ... that I really wa ... wanted to just, to, you know, I really saw the ... him ... the society, the culture, right in him, you know. (T: Mmm,
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 93

mmm.) And I really wanted to just ... to kind of deck him, you know, and that's something that's not uh my nature whatever, but I could just really wonder that ...
T62: Mmm, just like to have socked him.
C63: Yeah, yeah. And my friend said, you know, "one of these days", he says, if you ... "if you don't get it together" or, or something, he says ... not "that if you don't get it together", but he says, "one of these days you're gonna really lose it, you know". You know what I mean? It ... it's that I want to get rid of all that stuff that was done to me and not have to hear all that other stuff, (T: Mmm.) or to be able to deal with it in a very (T: Mmm) constructive kind of a way, you know. But still it grinds me because of all the other stuff that's happened to me. (T: Mmm.) And when I see other people doing it to other people, or whatever, it grinds me ... it makes me angry, you know? And I would think that in those situations, I've begun to kind of strike out, you know, or like you know, protecting somebody else or fighting for somebody else or whatever, and like I'm not sure what I did for myself, though, over those years that all that happened to me or whatever. (Pause.) Annnd, if I could cry and have it be all right...
T63: That's what I was thinking. (C: That would be ...) I was just thinking, if you could only cry.
C64: Yeah. It would, you know, but that's, that's a trip, you know ... that's a trip like uh...
T64: First place, a man doesn't cry.
C65: Yeah. For sure, for sure. That's a fact.
T65: But I guess you're saying that times you have that lump in your throat and you sure as hell feel like crying.
C66: For sure, for sure. (Pause.) Uhh, I don't know. (Sighs.) I don't know. Maybe going to a movie or one of those old, you know, (sighs) movies, dramas, or something like that ...
T66: Tear jerkers?
C67: Right ... so I can cry, you know, and have an excuse to cry, you know, but crying for myself, I'm not sure that, uh ... I'm just not sure that's going to be constructive, you know (laughs).
T67: Mmm, you say you're not sure whether crying for yourself is constructive. I feel also you're afraid of crying for yourself.
C68: I may be, I may be, because if I feel like crying and I don't, whenever there's some Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 94

things that are, you know ... but you see, that's a part of it too, you know? It's ... you know, and I, and I can't ... I, I hate to keep using these things of, you know, we're just being so conditioned not to, you know, from a little thing of, you know, like oh, you know, "be little, little men or big boys", or whatever. "Don't cry", and, and ...
T68: Probably your seven-year-old could cry.
C69: Yeah, for sure. I cried, I remember crying, but I cried alone. I never let anybody see me cry, you know? I wonder how many people have seen me cry! (Laughs.) (T: Laughs.) Two or three in the whole world. It's kind of interesting, you know. I remember living with my ex-wife, or whatever, she cried all the time. She cried get- ting up in the morning, and you know, just crying for crying, you know. I asked her sometimes about why she cried, and she just said, "I don't know, just wanted to, felt good". I don't know if that was healthy or whatever, but it probably is a lot more healthier than what I did.
T69: Mmm. It probably is better than never letting anyone see you cry.
C70: Right. There's just so many other ways to do it, you know, that I've learned, you know, like working hard. (T: Mmm.) Not thinking about it, (T: Mmm) you know. Not thinking about it.
T70: Just seeing that all the sorrow that you feel for yourself and for what's happened to you and all that, uh, "that doesn't really exist". It's just uh, you're too busy to have any thoughts of that.
C71: For sure.
T71: But the sorrow is still there.
C72: For sure. Yeah. And I really don't know how to de ... and I really don't know how to deal with that. I really don't. I really don't. (Sighs.) You know, just really giving so much of yourself and it's really crazy. Too much. (Sighs).
T72: If you did cry, what would some of the themes of that crying be?
C73: Well, just you know, all those, you know, hours that I, you know, that I spent away from my family and that I gave up my family and didn't see my children grow, you know. I really wanted that to be for some kind of a higher level, some kind of a cause, you know. But not to have that uh, to see anything, any benefit that I did. You know, all of that work, I mean, hours and hours and ... but it's just incredible, and I think that would be one, you know, I was saying, "Damn it, why in the hell did I spend so much time?" (T: Mmm.) "Why did I spend so much time?". You know, the leukemia, the ... everything that happened to me or whatever would be properly deserved if one person's life would have been changed, or something, you know. (T: Mmm.) And like, and maybe, maybe it has or whatever, but, but I think that I, I
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 95

don't trust that ... that it was worth it, you see?
T73 Mmm. Yeah. You invested a whole lot of caring, a whole lot of your self, and you feel real sorrow that maybe nothing came of that.
C74 Yeah, and I'd also like to uh just kind of cry for my father-in-law too, who was killed before I ... (T: Mmm,mmm, mmm, mmm.) about six months before I got the leukemia. (T: Mmm) I'd like to really tell him that I uh, that I really loved him a great deal.
T74: Mmm ... So you're telling me in place of telling him and maybe you could even speak to him, I don't know. But at any rate, you really would like to tell him, "I loved you, you know that? I loved you".
C75: Well, I, I really would, you know. Th-thisss situation that we started out ... I was married, and we married somebody of a different race, and we fought it out tooth and nail or whatever, and but, but yet we loved each other and we fished together and he was great with me. You know, he had a very ... to other people, a very cold way, you know, of, you know, "By God, this is the way it's going to be" and so forth. But I saw him when he was hurt too, and um when he was killed in, in 1975, in a, in a hunting accident, it just really took all of it, you know. (T: Mmm, mmm.) Because you see, he helped me to, to try to get out of that stuff. He's saying, "Hey, what are you doing, you know? Do ... what do you really want to do?". And at the time I wanted to, you know, to open my own restaurant or whatever. (T: Mmm.) And so he was going to help me finance that restaurant, you know. And so a week later he was killed. One week. And um, and so we were getting so close, but that I really never told him that, "Hey Dad, you know, hey Dad, I love you, I really love you". And we told each other, I guess, in some ways or whatever, but it's not the same as saying it, you know, as saying, "Dad, I really love you. I really care".
T75: You feel really sad that you never gave him a straight message on that, that "I love you".
C76: For sure, for sure, because he was straighter th ... with me than a lot of people, you know.
T76: Mmm.
C77: And to now to be taken away from all of that, you see, because it's only been, I don't know, eight months or so since I ceased all communication with my family, you know, family that ... my wife's family that I've loved and I've cared for and that I buried my father-in-law and that was it. That was the ... and then even the family began to take on those same things of the culture, you know.
T77: Things began to fall apart for you there, mmm, mmm.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 96

C78: For sure, for sure, you know. And lately, I don't know, falling apart or at least my being able to see that uh that it really wasn't, it wasn't true. (T: I see.) It wasn't real, I wasn't getting, I wasn't getting anything back, I wasn't getting any nourishment back, you know. (T: Mmm, mmm, mmm) Smiles and polite kisses and things like that, you know. That is, you know, part of the hurt, you know. I'd rather for somebody to say, you know, "I think you're a lousy S.O.B. or whatever", as opposed to saying, "Hello, dear, how are you?" You know, you know?.
T78: Mmm, mmm, mmm. When the real message perhaps is, "I think you're a lousy S.O.B.".
C79: Right, right, you know.
T79: Mmm.
C80: (25 second pause). Yeah, so there's, you know, there's a few things.
T80: Part of the sorrow would be for your father-in-law. You'd really weep for him.
C81: I ... yeah, I think I would, you know. And just maybe I still think that I really wish that I could, you know, just say, "Hey, you know, you guys, you really don't realize what you did to me", you know? Because for a while, I just, you know, saying, well, you know, "racist", "terrible", "blah, blah, blah". But that doesn't say anything, you know, because it doesn't say how I really feel, you know. (T: I see.) But they, but it, but it ... they wouldn't understand that, they wouldn't understand how a black person could be hurt, you know, because if you don't accept a person as human, how can you, how can you think about, you know, like ... it's like thinking a dog could be hurt of whatever, you know, people that don't have dogs and don't understand them, you know?
T81: But you get some satisfaction out of saying, "You people don't realize how much you hurt me". They might not be able to hear that message, but you'd get some satisfaction out of ... out of expressing that, out of ... out of letting, letting yourself know, letting others know that, "God, I've been hurt!"
C82: Yeah.
T82: "I've been wounded".
C83: I just don't think I could do that 'cause I just don't think that that that, I just don't trust, you know, you know, I wouldn't do it because I just wouldn't want to give them the satisfaction, you know. It's like I feel like, you know, my saying, you know, "Maybe that is my feeling". But I, I have too many times, you know, when you know, I opened up a little bit or whatever, and someone says ... (T: Mmm.) ... you know, squash!
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 97

T83: So there are probably loads of people you wouldn't dare open up to on that, but I guess you're opening up to me to say, "Yes, but I have been really wounded, badly, by a lot of people".
C84: For sure. Mmm. I maybe think that you can understand that a little bit in terms of about hurt and that, you know, that ... you know, that I, you know, that I'm a person and uh, (pause) you know, I'm a person. And I don't really want that denied to me ... (T: Mmm.) you know, ever again.
T84: Mmm, mmm.
C85: Youknow.Icouldreallygetangry. T85: Mmm. mmm.
C86: I don't you know, I just ... that's not going to happen to me, you know. In a way, you know, I don't want to love anybody like I did my father-in-law again, and for God's sake, you know, that's, that's painful, but I know that's terribly sick too, that you have to love, you have to continue to love people. Or whatever. But at that time, it was the only thing that was productive. It was the only thing that was something that was, you know, as Fromm talks about, biophilic. It was growth; it was nourishing. And that was the only thing, and that was just taken away from me, and it was taken away from me just ...
T86: Just like that.
C87: Youknow,Itwasjustreallystrange,youknow.
T87: So that, that's been a ... a hurt and a shock and makes you feel, "I can't risk myself loving somebody else like that because that might disappear some way or other".
C88: For sure, for sure. For sure. I certainly don't want any more in-laws. (Laughs). Be they uh whatever color. I'm not sure I want them, but now you know ... And that's ... I think that's part of it, you know. More so than, than the risking loving somebody, just because their death ... death I know is inevitable. But it's that, that other collection of things around it, or whatever. But you know, it's... it¡¯s crazy.
T88: It's what?
C89: It's crazy to love, you know, it's just like loving a pet rock or something, you know, it's nothing. Nothing, you don't feel.
T89: Mmm. mmm. "Love goes out from me but nothing comes back".
C90: Right. And I'm not so sure that that, that I want that, it to work like that again, you know. And maybe by ... maybe saying that, I don't know, maybe you know, calling,
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 98

say, "Hey, I really was hurt" and everything like that or whatever. Maybe that would be a start or whatever, but I just don't really trust that they really understand that. (T: Mmm) I don't really, really uh ... it took my wife who lived with me for seven years, you know, after I left, maybe six, seven months to understand that I was, that I was hurt, that I was ... that I was desperate.
T90: You feel there's so little chance of anyone else really understanding you.
C91: Mmm, that sounds kind of, yeah, well, (small laugh), so little chance for that group of people understanding me. (T: OK.) And I believe it. I really believe it, you know. It would just, it would be like me trying to, uh, to understand or to, to tell Dick Nixon or something about my feelings, that I just don't think he could relate to that,you know. (T: Mmm.) And I'm using, and ... and I'm really serious about that example, because he's so far away from me and my reality, and that family, you know, I found out was so far away from me and my reality that, you know, it was insane, you know. It was really insane, you know. So I think on one level I feel OK for loving them.
T91: You feel...?
C92: OKforlovingthem. T92: I see, mmm, mmm.
C93: But I don't feel OK for sharing any more with them. (T: Mmm.) And sharing that hurt is just, (T: Mmm) you know ... and maybe sharing it with other people would be OK. But I know I'm moving away from the other too, you know, that's really important to me right now. And I don't know ... maybe I won't ... I'm not rushing it, it just seems to want to get out and jump out or whatever, but, you know, you know. It's clearly must have really gone through ... my body really must have gone through some changes or whatever because, you know, something there is just keeping it, keeping it down, and I know all those reasons but I can't uh, I can't seem to muster that power to ... (T: Mmm.) ... to get it, to get that out, you know, to really, you know.
T93: It's still too much locked in.
C94: Yeah, for sure. But it really, it really helps, you know, um, 'cause it's, it's, it's just, you know ... it's incredible, you know, this is the first time I've talked to anybody that, you know, that I haven't really been in control. To some extent I've really given up a lot of control uh ... to you.
T94: Mmm, mmm, sort of letting things loose rather than ... (C: For sure.) ... keeping them under your control.
C95: Forsure.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 99

T95: And that's a new experience.
C96: A very new experience for me. Very new experience. And maybe I don't know if it's just not, just it's a function, function of that too, you know, or something, you know. Things are rattling around in my head now (laughs), you know. But all the other, it's just bullshit, and like I have been hurt and I really don't want to get involved anymore in terms of with people that can't return love and can't accept people. I just don't really want to get involved anymore. I'm sick and tired ... sick of it.
T96: Sounds as though you're more accepting of yourself as a person who is vulnerable, who has been hurt, who is hurting, and who wants love ... who doesn't want it all to be a one-way street of giving love. You want love back in return.
C97: Mmm, mmm. Yeah. And I wanna be able to uh, to feel and to, and to cry. (T: Mmm.) And not to be afraid of crying, and, and not to be afraid of, uh ... I want to be able and I'm going to work for that. I really wanna work for that. I, I know I do, you know, I just have this thing, ah, you know. If I trust the doctors, I'd have them cut 'em, cut me open and get that out, you know, but I don't. (Laughing.)
T97: (Laughs.) Mmm. Probably'd be simpler to have an operation.
C98: Oh yeah! (Sighs). Yeah, yeah, yeah. But I, but do you, do you, do you, do you, do you feel that ... you know, like I really wanna, you know, tell you how hurt I am, but I'm not, I can't tell you?
T98: I understand that. I ... you're, you're uh, it visualizes in my mind you're walking all around the edge of that pit, but you're not really letting yourself down into it; so you're letting me know all about it (clears throat), but, but not it.
C99: Yeah. For sure. Yeah. Don't know how to do that. (T: Mmm.) You know?
T99: Yeah. I, I hear you saying, "I really want to get to that, but it will have to be at my pace. I can't ... I can't force it. I can't... but I do want to get to it".
C100: Yeah. 'Cause I want to get to it really fast, you know, because that's all a part of me right now that's really ... I really feel that's sick, that's really the cancer, (T: Mmm) you know. That if I could eliminate that, I could eliminate all the cancer from my body. (T: Mmm.) I really believe it, you know. And I really blame, I really blame the way I lived and the stress and everything else like that on, on on the disease. I really do.
T100: You mean, you blame the disease on all that stress, is what you mean?
C101: Right, for sure, yeah. I have it turned around. For sure. I do. I do. And to some
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 100

extent, I blame racism. (T: Mmm, mmm.) You know, I just don't want to get caught up into that anymore, you know, and I want to continue to give, but I don't, I, I, I'm just not going to do it the way I did it before. And uh, I don't know. May ... yelling sometimes you know, like when I came in here, I was thinking about yelling, you know, one of those long, big long ... you know. But I'm not sure that I want to do that. (Smiles.)
T101: You could try it.
C102: (Laughs.) You know, I don't know, you know (Laughs.) That wouldn't be cultured.
T102: (Laughs.) Standards, standards, standards.
C103: Sure,Imean,I'mreally,Iwasreallysocialized.
T103: You were brought up right ... weren't you?
C104: Oh yeah, I was. I learned all of it ... all of it.
T104: And still in spite of yourself, buy a good deal of it.
C105: Yeah.Yeah.
T105: You really don't want to, but still you find ... (C: Yeah.) ... you can't do the uncultu- red thing.
C106: For sure. There were standards, I guess, and uh, that are really foreign to me, but uh, you know, the, the thing that, you know ... that I thought about you know, and like you know, I was like in terms of expressing my anger, whatever, comes out in terms of, you know (sighs), possible obscenity, you know (laughs), you know, like calling somebody a bunch of something or whatever would really, you know, I don't know what it would do, but you know, I'd really like to do that, you know.
T106: That helps to explain why I feel you've kept your language more, quite guarded here. I, I, I realize I've used more profanity than you have. (Laughs.)
C107: (Laughs.) For sure, you know. It's not because of, you know, but I don't know, it's just a, a part of that, you know, like I was just ...
T107: You'd like to just tell off the bastard!
C108: Yeah, right, right, right. For sure. (Laughs.) Oh my goodness! (Laughs.) T108: You can't even do that. (Laughs.)
C109: (Sighs.) Oh, it's incredible. I don't know. Whew! I'm getting warm.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 101

T109: C110:
(Laughs.) Both inside and outside
Yes, right, right. I'm getting extremely warm. Um, yeah, maybe I'll be able to do it one day, I guess. Maybe I'll be able to do it (laughs). I really haven't used ... but see, when I get out of here, I'll use a lot of profanity, you know. I don't, you know, just in terms of, you know, like I ... I, I, I, I think I did, you know, when I was really angry talking to my wife and things like that, you know, where I was just, "Goddammit", and all of that, you know, "bastards" and some other things and like, you know, I was raised properly, you know (laughs.). Uh, yeah, but I think part of that would be a part of expressing my (T: Mmm) feelings and everything like that, you know.
It wouldn't come out in nice, polite language.
No, it wouldn't. It, it really wouldn't. It really wouldn't. To my teachers that I had, to the family that I had, uh, to a lot of my colleagues, you know, and others. And ... but I don't know if I really want to tell them, you know, maybe it's just a part of just being proud and, and everything else like that, but at least to myself I, I need to get it out and openly.
Yeah. You may not tell it to them face to face, but you need to get it out of yourself somehow.
Mmm. Somehow, yeah, yeah. Really rotten and I really feel s ... you know, really screwed. I really feel ... (T: Mmm.) ... so badly.
"The bastards really screwed me".
Yeah, I know. They ... they got me, you know. It was just like uh, being part, I guess, that had something to do with being in, you know, I guess, you know, I just ... I just wipe 'em out, you know, if you don't get them with their bodies you do it in their mind, you know, like it happened, you know, and it was ... it was real, you know, and you know, to try to describe that hell to somebody is just the, the hardest thing, you know. But it's like, you know, just somebody knocking you down ... (T: Mmm.) ... and it's somebody coming and stomping on you and spitting on you and everything like that, and like it's just, you know, and just being at ... feeling like garbage.
Mmm, mmm.
And I have the feeling that people have made me feel like garbage, you know, and like ... you know? I'm sure that my friends would say, you know, God, I had everything. But I didn't have everything. I didn't have everything. Certainly didn't have that respect as a person.
 T110: C111:
T111: C112:
T112: C113:
T113: C114:
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 102

T114:
C115: T115: C116:
T116: C117:
T117: C118:
T118: C119:
T119: C120:
But there were a lot of people who, though they may or may not have beaten you physically, treated you in a way that just trampled on you and beat you up and spit on you and made you a nobody, a piece of garbage.
Right. And it won't happen again. Not if I can help it (small laugh).
Mmm.
It's 'cause I'm really tired of fighting. (T: Mmm.) Really tired of expending that kind of energy. (T: Mmm.) It really is just, is straining, it's too draining, and like, you know, I don't really know what's gonna happen in terms of, you know, how I'm going to do that, you know. Get it out or (sighs) or whatever, but you know, I just don't really want to say that I'm hurt or whatever, because that is ... that isn't even descriptive (small laugh) enough for what really happened.
Yeah. To say a word like that or several of the words you've used just isn't at all the same as feeling those feelings inside and really feeling them fully.
It really is, uh, I don't know if you saw "The Excorcist", but it really is, really is, you know, that oohf, you know, I remember a scene in that movie where the girl who threw up this green slime, you know, and that's really, it's that, you know, it's that bad, you know, it's, you know, it's that, it's that bad. 'Cause I know it ... I know it now, you know. It's not a part of me and my body really wants to reject that, but how to, how to throw that up is ...
Yeah, how to ... how to vomit up that green slime that's been a part of your experience.
Yeah. Maybe I'm just afraid I'll look horrible, you know, or, or that I'd look horrible, or whatever, expressing that kind of anger, that kind of uh, that kind of hurt or whatever.
You wouldn't look civilized; you wouldn't look cultured.
(Laughs.) I don't, I don't know, you know. (Sighs.) I don't really know. But right now, the ... more than getting that out, I think the, uh, the overriding thing is that I wanna keep at least that control, to control that, for fear of, you see, I don't really want to get sick again (T: Mmm, mmm.) You know, and like I think this, the slightest, you know, just by being weak, by submitting to that kind of pain, um, somehow bring back my uh ...
You wonder about that ... whether if you, if you let out all the ... all the hell that you've experienced inside, it might uh, it might bring back your illness.
And that doesn't sound logical, does it? (Laughs.) I know that. (T: Smiles.) Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 103

T120: C121:
T121:
C122:
T122: C123: T123: C124:
T124: C125:
T125: C126:
T126: C127: T127: C128:
O.K. (Laughs.)
Thank you, thank you very much. (Sighs.) Oh, God. What a ... mmm. (20 second pause). I don't know. God, you know, I feel so beaten. I ... when I feel beaten right now, and I'm not sure why, but that in a way the, that I got, uh ... I really got something to say and it just, you know, and I know I'd feel better. But maybe I w- ouldn't, you know, I really talk ... God, I realize how I'm talking in circles. I seem to be talking in circles. Does it sound like uh?
No, not quite. It's more spirals, I think. (C: Laughs.) Getting, as you say, getting very close, you feel, you feel beaten right now as though, if only something could come out, you wouldn't feel beaten.
(Pause) Yeah (sighs) Think that you know, just ... that turned, that almost turned me into something really inhuman.
Mmm.
Ireallyalmostletitturnmeintosomethingreallyinhuman.
It damn near made an animal out of you.
Damn near, damn near, yeah. So you see, if uh, I don't want that to happen anymore. At all. Not gonna do it to me again (laughs).
No. That's very clear.
No. I know that doesn't help the other problem, but at least I know that (laughs), and I really do know that, you know. (T: Mmm, mmm.) Because I don't think anybody has a right to do that to anybody. Nobody ... teacher, wife, husband, whatever. Uh uh, and it, and it really wasn't my fault either and uh, and like I'm not the blameless ... I mean, I'm not without any blame or whatever, but you know, you know ... just like somebody took a big goddamned tree and just rammed it up ... ooh, so, you know? (Sighs.) Hard to describe, you know, you know?
Took a great big stick and rammed it up your ass ... Is that what you're saying? (Laughs.) I, I didn't say that.
Is that what you meant?
That'swhatImeant.
OK. That's what I want to know, whether I was catching your meaning correctly. Yeah, for sure. You know, and you know that that probably would be painful.
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 104

T128: C129:
T129: C130:
T130: C131:
T131:
C132:
(Sighs.)
And it's that kind of pain that you've suffered.
Yeah. (Pause). You just can't let it ... I just, I just can't let it happen again. (Sighs. 18 second pause.) I um really, uh, I just really don't know how to tell you how badly I've been hurt, you know. I really don't.
Goes beyond words.
Yeah. But I know, you know, it's there, and maybe I should attend to it a little bit more. But, goddammit, you know, just ooh...
You're feeling some of that hurt now.
Yeah. I am. I was thinking a ... about a wino on a street that continues to drink, doesn't have a place to live. You know I've seen so many people go by, they're the kind of person, you know, disgusting, don't want to work or whatever. But you know, I really feel like there may be some reasons. (T: Mmm.) And I know one thing, I'm gonna allow that person to be desperate ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) Because I'm thinking that probably people like that do things out of desperation. And um, 'cause I know, you know? I never really had a drinking problem or anything like that, but it's the kind of sensitivity that I've gotten from all of that.
Mmm, mmm. It seems, it seems to me that you're uh feeling it ... you know what it's like to be in desperation and you know what it could drag you to, and so maybe that¡¯s what¡¯s happened to some of them. Something like that.
For sure. For sure. And I think that I ... I think my, my heart goes out to people like that, people who can't afford to to do this or whatever, and ... because see, I had a lot of money and you know, it all left. And uh, but in a way I'm happier now, you know. But I really don't know, not sure really where to go next, but I know that I don't really want that kind of life anymore. That I wanna give, I wanna help, and I wanna talk to people or whatever, and before I do that, you know, I wanna get my thing together, and a part of that is just maybe admitting, you know, and I guess maybe admitting that I'm hurt and showing and expressing my hurt or whatever will, will reaffirm the fact that I'm a person (T: Mmm, mmm.) Because apart from that, I think showing that is a, you know, pulling myself up too high, (T: Mmm.) you know, and that¡¯s what everybody, you know, that's the way everything was.
"I don't, I don't feel it ... I don't hurt, I'm, I'm fine"... That¡¯s a lot of bullshit. For sure. But at least I'm admitting to you that I'm hurt, you know.
Yeah, that's right, mmm. And just for a moment there, I felt you really were experiencing that too, really feeling that stick shoved up your ass.
T132: C133: T133:
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 105

C134:
T134: C135:
T135:
C136:
T136: C137: T137: C138:
T138: C139:
T139:
C140: T140: C141:
Oh, yeah, you know, when I, you know, what is, you know how your natural reaction, you know, when you start feeling stuff like that, or at least when I do, I just kind of, you know, I've got to put it all out of, out of my mind, bring it down to a different level. And I think that's what I'm doing, I keep doing, you know, when I get to the point. Gotta bring it to a safe level.
Yeah. That's right. You get that close, you get that close to the pit and then pull away a little.
(Pause.) For sure. You, you ... is it all right to have everybody else to blame? (Laughs.) (T: laughs.) You know, for your, for your problem, instead of sharing some of that. But I shared, you know, I, I, I think I've really, I shared that, you know.
I think ... I think what you're saying is, "I feel as though, dammit, everybody else is to blame. My mind says, Oh, no, you have, you probably have a part in it too, but..." (C: Sure. Sure.) ...your feelings are ...
Yeah, yeah. And I guess I hurt myself. I didn't, other people ... maybe if I can clarify that ... I let myself be hurt. (T: Mmm, mmm.) You know, because I just gave too much, you know.
Mmm. Made yourself vulnerable sometimes. Really. And not sometimes ... most of the times. Most of the times.
You know, by being, you know, just by being, by sharing, by being there, by giving, you know, and really loving. Because I do have that sense of a total, you know, that just, I wanna love, that's my nature.
Mmm, mmm.
But you know, I, I've really never been this beaten. I never ... you know, never have.
I want to be clear about your meaning. You've never felt so much of being beaten as you do right now? Is that what you're saying?
Well,throughthiswholething,youknow.
Yeah.
Just beaten, you know, just really beaten, and I think that if I show you how much
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 106

T141: C142:
T142: C143: T143: C144: T144: C145: T145: C146: T146
C147: T147:
C148: T148: C149: T149:
I've been beaten or whatever, you know, like I'd probably, you know, become nothing in this chair, you know, just ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) You know? (Laughs.)
You might practically disappear if you really let me know how hurt and beaten and awful you feel.
Mmm, for sure. For sure. You know, I could tell you some times I mean that would just, you know, maybe blow you away, you know. (T: Mmmm.) ... (Sighs and appears on the edge of crying during a 20 second pause.) Really too much for me.
Hmm?
It'sreallytoomuchforme.
Too much. Mmm.
Ifeellikeit.
I, I think you feel as though, "I've gone about as far as I can go at this point". Yeah. Mmm, yeah, really. (Laughs.) When I start smiling, I know I am. Mmm. Taking a drink of water.
For sure. (Laughs.) Well, you know, but I'm being truthful about it anyway.
Mmm, yeah. Yeah, I feel, I feel too. Uh, you've walked around that pit of hurt and pain and beaten-ness, and you've, you've felt some of it and uh, and perhaps that's as far as you can go right at this moment.
Yeah.
Even though you know there's more there, you know that you're keeping some of it down. Um and to know those things may be helpful too.
Yeah. You see, because I, I can talk about this leukemia and and all this stuff and everything like that and ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) well, I guess it's you know...
Fascinating. And it's easier to talk about leukemia and the possibility of death and all that, than it is to talk about all the hurt and awfulness that you've suffered.
Yeah. (Sighs.) Whew, oh, I really, whew, a lot, you know (sighs). I have to stop. OK?
OK. All right, mmm. Gone about as far as you can go.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 107

C150: Right.
T150: Mmm. OK, we'll call it quits.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 108

FINAL COMMENT BY ROGERS
[Source: Box 137/4, Carl Rogers Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC]
Here is an armor-plated man. He has been sufficiently hurt that he hides his real feelings very deeply. But in this relationship, the armor begins to crack - just begins to crack. He says, "This is the first time I've ever talked to anybody that I haven't really been in control". So in this understanding climate he lets himself creep closer to the experiencing of his feelings.
My image is that he is walking all around his own private slough of despond. We find the upper layer is anger, but further down in the slime are the unspeakable hurts, and the feelings of being tramped on, defeated and humiliated. He gets so close to experiencing some of this, that his expressions become eloquent nonverbal communication: "Ooooh!" "Whew! Whew, oh, whew! I've got to stop". I feel that at that moment he puts his foot into this dreaded pit, but then has to draw back. I don't regret this. I regard it as demonstrating the wisdom of the client. He knows where the worst spots are in his experiencing. He knows what he can tolerate. He has to proceed at his own pace.
Along the way we see how powerful metaphor is in the deeper ranges of psychotherapy. Metaphor is so much more expressive than an intellectual description... The lump in his throat... The ability to speak from "up here" and not from "down there"... The goddamn tree stuck up his ass... The green slime that must be vomited... They all speak vividly of his feelings, without naming those feelings.
From an intellectual and theoretical point of view there are bits that fascinate me.
His introjected self is his cultured self, the quotes "credit to his race". It has little relation to the real feelings in which he could discover his real self.
Another bit. He reports very convincingly that if he let his feelings all out, it would make him sick again. But hearing those exact words spoken acceptantly by me, makes him realize it's a ridiculous view. To me that's a fascinating interchange.
Here¡¯s another bit. When I give him full permission to be as angry as he wishes, that stops him completely. Then he can no longer avoid the fact that it is not his anger that he is afraid of, but the hurting and vulnerable part of him.
Then there is the mourning which accompanies unexpressed love, the love for his father-in-law which he was never able to communicate. I think he gained from communicating it to me.
Finally, he makes it very clear that for him there are many more frightening aspects of his life than the prospect of death. Somehow this seems to contain a message for all of us.
As for me, I felt very present in the relationship, an understanding companion on this trip of exploration which seemed so potentially dangerous to him. I think it is a good example of how I work with an articulate client.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, Post-Session Commentary, page 109


Case 8:
Transcripts of Carl Rogers' Therapy Sessions Edited by Barbara T. Brodley and Germain Lietaer Volume 12
Year Page Gloria Filmed Interview 1965 2
Sylvia 4th Interview (Filmed) 1975 21 Commentary interspersed throughout
Sylvia 5th Interview (Filmed) 1975 39 Commentary interspersed throughout
Kathy Filmed Interview 1975 53 Commentary 67
Dione 1st Filmed Interview 1977 68 Commentary interspersed throughout
Dione 2nd Filmed Interview 1977 1977 85
  Final Comments
109
   These transcripts are available for purposes of research, study and teaching. They may not be sold.
Throughout these interviews the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 1

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 [Source: Shostrom, E. L. (1965). Three approaches to psychotherapy (Part I)[Film]. Orange, CA: Psychological Films.]
GLORIA
DR. CARL ROGERS PART I -- DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM [Before the Interview]
"From my own years of therapeutic experience, I have come to feel that if I can create the proper climate, the proper, relationship, the proper conditions, a process of therapeutic movement will almost inevitably occur in my client. You may ask, 'What is this climate? What are these conditions? Will they exist in the interview with the woman I am about to talk with, whom I have never seen before?' Let me try to describe very briefly what these conditions are as I see them.
First of all, one question is, can I be real in the relationship? This has come to have an increasing amount of importance to me over the years. I feel that genuineness is another way of describing the quality I would like to have. I like the term 'congruent', by which. I mean that what I am experiencing inside is present in my awareness and comes out through my communication. In a sense, when I have this quality, I am all in one piece in the relationship. There is another word that describes it for me. I feel that in the relationship, I would like to have a 'transparency.' I would be quite willing for my client to see all the way through me, that there would be nothing hidden. And when lam real in
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 2

this fashion that I'm trying to describe, then know that my own feelings will often bubble up into awareness and be expressed, but be expressed in ways that won't impose themselves on my client.
Then the second question I would have is, will I find myself prizing this person, caring for this person? I certainly don't want to pretend a if I dislike my client persistently, I feel it is better, that I should express it. But I know that the process of therapy is much more likely to occur and constructive change is much more likely, if I feel a real spontaneous prizing of this individual with whom I'm working, a prizing of this person as a separate individual. You can call that quality acceptance, you can call it caring, you can call it a non-possessive love if you wish. I think any of those terms tend to describe it. I know that the relationship will prove more constructive if it's present.
Then the third quality, will I be able to understand the inner world of this individual from the inside? Will I be able to see it through her eyes? Will I be able to be sufficiently sensitive to move around inside the world of her feelings so that I know what it feels like to be her so that I can sense not only the surface meanings, but some of the meanings that lie somewhat underneath the surface. I know that if I can let myself sensitively and accurately enter into her world of experience, then change and therapeutic movement are much more likely.
Well, suppose I am fortunate and that I do experience some of these attitudes in the relationship, what then? Well, then a variety of things are likely to happen. Both from my clinical experience and from our research investigations we find that if attitudes of the sorts that I have described are present, then quite a number of things will happen. She'll explore some of her feelings and attitudes more deeply. She is likely to discover some
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 3

hidden aspects of herself that she wasn't aware of previously. Feeling herself prized by me, it is quite possible she'll come to prize herself more. Feeling that some of her meanings are understood by me, then she can more readily perhaps listen to herself, listen to what is going on within her own experience, listen to some of the meanings she hasn't been able to catch before. And perhaps if she senses realness in me, she'll be able to be a little more real within herself. I suspect there will be a change in the manner of her expression, at least this has been my experience in other instances. From being rather remote from her experiencing, remote from
what is going on within her, it's possible that she'll move toward more immediacy of experiencing, that she will be able to sense and explore what is going on in her in the immediate moment. From being disapproving of herself, it is quite possible she'll move toward a greater degree of acceptance of herself. From somewhat of a fear of relating, she may move toward being able to relate more directly and to encounter me more directly. From construing life in somewhat rigid black and white patterns,' she may move toward more tentative ways of construing her experience and of seeing meanings in it. From a locus of evaluation which is outside of herself, it is quite possible she will move toward recognizing a greater capacity within herself for making judgments and drawing conclusions. So those are some of the changes that we have tended to find and I think that they are all of them changes that are characteristic of the process of therapy or of therapeutic movement. If I have any success in creating the kind of conditions that I described initially, then we may be able to see some of these changes in this client even though I know in advance that our contact is going to be very brief.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria, Introduction, page 4

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 Note: Gestures were transcribed by Barbara T. Brodley.
GLORIA
[Source: Shostrom, E. L. (1965). Three approaches to psychotherapy [Film]. Orange, CA: Psychological Films.]
THERAPIST: DR. CARL ROGERS
T1 (Rogers stands as Gloria enters.) Good morning. (C: Hello, Dr. Rogers) I'm Dr. Rogers, you must be Gloria. (They shake hands and sit down.)
C2 Yes, I am.
T2 Won't you have a chair? Now then, we have half an hour together, and I really don't know what we will be able to make of it but uh I hope we can make something of it. I'd be glad to know whatever concerns you. (T: Sitting forward, C: Sitting back, legs crossed, right arm over the back of the chair)
C3 Well, right now I'm nervous (T: Mhm) but I feel more comfortable the way you are talking in a low voice and I don't feel like you'll be so harsh on me. But, ah ...
T3 I hear the tremor in your voice so I know you are... (C: Smiles)
C4 Uh, well, the main thing I um, want to talk to you about is uh, I'm just newly divorced and uh I had gone in therapy before and I felt comfortable when I left, and all of a sudden now the biggest change is adjusting to my single life. (T: Mhm, mhm) And uh one of the things that bothers me the most is especially men, and having men to the house and how it affects the children (T: Mhm, Mhm) and- Uh, the biggest thing I want - the thing that keeps coming to my mind I want to tell you about is that I have a daughter, nine, who at one time I felt had a lot of emotional problems. I wish I could stop shaking (T and C: laugh). And uh, I'm real conscious of things affecting her. I don't want her to get upset, I don't want to shock her. I want so bad to- for her to accept me. And we're real open with each other especially about sex. And the other day she saw a girl that was single but pregnant and she asked me all about "can girls get pregnant if they are single?" And the conversation was fine and I wasn¡¯t un- at ease at all with her until she asked me if I had ever made love to a man since I left her daddy and I lied to her. And ever since that, it keeps
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 5

coming up to my mind because I feel so guilty lying to her because I never lie and I want her to trust me. And I want- I almost want an answer from you. I want you to tell me if it would affect her wrong if I told her the truth, or what. (T:Mhm)
T4 And it's this concern about her and the fact that you really aren't - that this open relationship that has existed between you, now you feel it's kind of vanished?
C5 Yes. I feel like I have to be on guard about that (T: Mhm) because I remember when I was a little girl, when I first found out my mother and father made love, that was dirty and terrible, and I didn't- I didn¡¯t like her any more for awhile. And I don't want to lie to Pammy either and I don't know...
T5 I sure wish I could give you the answer as to what you should tell her. (Smiles.) C6 I was afraid you were going to say that (Laughs).
T6 Because what you really want is an answer.
C7 I want to especially know if it would affect her if I was completely honest and open with her or if it would affect her because I lied. I feel like it is bound to make a strain because I lied to her. [Words lost]
T7 Mhm. You feel she'll suspect that, or she'll know something is not quite right?
C8 I feel that in time she will distrust me, yes (T: Mhm, mhm). And also I thought well, gee, what about when she gets a little older and she finds herself in touchy situations. She probably wouldn't want to admit it to me because she thinks I'm so good and so sweet. (Points to herself.) And yet I'm afraid she could think I'm really a- a devil. And I want so bad for her to accept me. And I don't know how much a nine-year-old can take.
T8 And really both alternatives concern you. That she may think you're too good or better than you really are.
C9 Yes.
T9 And she may think you are worse than you are.
C10 Not worse than I am. (Smiles) I don't know if she can accept me the way I am. I think I paint a picture that I'm all sweet and motherly. And -- I'm a little ashamed of my shady side too. (T:Mhm, mhm)
T10 I see. It really cuts a little deeper. If she really knew you, would she, could she accept you?
C11 This is what I don't know. Yeah. I don't want her to turn away from me. (T: That Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 6

relationship-) And I don't even know how I feel about it because there are times when I feel so guilty like when I have a man over, I even try to make a special set-up so that if I were ever alone with him, the children would never catch me in that sort of thing. Because I'm real leery about it (T: Mhm). And yet I also know that I have these desires.
T11 And so it¡¯s quite clear it isn't only her problem or the relationship with her, it's in you as well.
C12 And my guilt. Yeah. Yeah. (T: Oh) I feel guilty so often. (Moistens lips.)
T12 "What- What can I accept myself as doing?" And uh (C: Yes, Yes) you realize that you set up sort of subterfuges, so as to make sure that you're not caught or something, you realize that you are acting from guilt, is that it?
C13 Yes (T: Mhm, mhm) and I don't like the ... I would like to feel comfortable with whatever I do. If I choose not to tell Pammy the truth, to feel comfortable that she can handle it, (T: Mhm, Mhm, Mhm) and I don't. I want to be honest, and yet I feel there are some areas that I don't even accept (T: Mhm, Mhm) .
T13 And if you can't accept them in yourself, how could you possibly be comfortable in telling them to her?
C14 Right.
T14 Mhm. Mhm. And yet, as you say, you do have these desires and you do have your feelings, but- but you don't feel good about them.
C15 Right. (T: Nods and smiles.) (Pause) And I, I, I have a feeling that you are just going to sit there and let me stew in it (laughs) and I- I want more. I want you to help me get rid of my guilt feeling. If I can get rid of my guilt feeling about lying or going to bed with a single man, any of that, just so I can feel more comfortable.
T15 Mhm. And I guess I'd like to say, "No, I don't want to let you stew in your feelings," but on the other hand, I, I also feel that this is the kind of very private thing that I couldn't possibly answer for you. But I sure as anything will try to help you work toward your own answer. I don't know whether that makes any sense to you, but I mean it.
C16 Well, I appreciate you saying that. (Takes her arm off back of chair, now uses both hands to gesture.) You sound like you mean it. But I don't know where to go. (T: Mhm, Mhm, Mhm) I don't begin to know where to go. I thought that I had pretty well worked over most of my guilt, and now that this is coming up I'm disappointed in myself. (T: Mhm, Mhm) I really am. I want- I like it when I feel that no matter what I do, even if it's against my own morals or my upbringing, that I can still feel good about me. And now I don't. Like uh, there's a girl at work who sort of mothers
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 7

me and she just- she- I think she thinks I'm all sweet, and I sure don't want to show my more ornery devilish side with her. I want to be sweet and it's so hard for me to - this all seems so new again (T: Mhm) and it's so disappointing.
T16 Yeah, I get the disappointment - that here, a lot of these things you¡¯d thought you'd worked through, and now the guilts and the feeling that only a part of you is acceptable to anybody else.
C17 Yes.
T17 That keeps coming out. (Pause) (C: Strains eyebrows.) I guess I do catch the real deep puzzlement that you feel as to "What the hell shall I do? What can I do?"
C18 Yes, and do you know what I can find, doctor, (Touches forehead.) is that everything I start to do that I st- impulsive, seems natural to tell Pammy, or- or to go out on a date or something, I¡¯m comfortable until I think how I was affected as a child and the minute that comes up, then I'm all haywire. (T: Mhm) Like uh, I want to be a good mother so bad, and I feel like I am a good mother, (T: Mhm) but then there's those little exceptions. Like my guilts with working. I want to work and it's so fun having extra money. I like to work nights. The minute I think I'm not being real good to the children or giving them enough time, then I start feeling guilty again. Then, that¡¯s when I- it¡¯s uh- what do they call it? (Looks away briefly.) A double bind. That's just what it feels like. I want to do this and it feels right, but after all I'm not being a good mother and I want to be both. I am becoming more and more aware of what a perfectionist I am. That is what it seems I want to be so perfect. Either I want to become perfect in my standards, or not have that need any more.
T18 Or, I guess I hear it a little differently - that uh- what you want is to seem perfect, but it means it¡¯s- a great- a matter of great importance to you to be a good mother and you want to seem to be a good mother, even if some of your actual feelings differ from that. (Points to C.) Is that catching it or not?
C19 Gee, I don't feel like I am saying that. (T: Oh, okay) No, that isn't what I feel, really. I want to approve of me always, but my actions won't let me. I want to approve of me. (Pause) I ¨C I think- (Strains face.)
T19 I realize ... you -- alright, but let me -- I¡¯d like to understand it. You sound as though your actions were kind of outside of you. You want to approve of you, but what you do somehow won't let you approve of yourself.
C20 Right. (Pause) Like I feel that I can't approve of myself regarding, for example (Smiles.), my sex life. (T: Mhm, Mhm) This is the big thing. If I really fell in love with a man and I respected him and I adored him, I don't think I would feel so guilty going to bed with him and I don't think I would have to make up any excuses to the children because they could see my natural caring for him. (T: Mhm, Okay) But
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 8

when I have the physical desires and I'll say, "Oh well, why not," and I want to anyway, but I feel guilty afterwards. I hate facing the kids, I don't like looking at myself, and I rarely enjoy it. And this is what I mean. If the circumstances would be different, I don't think I'd feel so guilty because I'd feel right about it. (Gestures more profoundly.)
T20 Yeah, I- I guess I hear you saying, "If what I was doing, when I went to bed with a man, was really genuine and full of love and respect and so on, I wouldn't feel guilty in relation to Pam. I wouldn¡¯t uh, I, I really would be comfortable about the situation."
C21 That's how I feel, yeah. (Smiles.) And I know that sounds like I want a perfect situation, but that is how I feel. And in the meantime, I can't stop these desires. I tried that also. I¡¯ve tried saying, "O.K., I don't like myself when I do that so I won't do it any more." But then I resent the children. I think, why should they stop me from doing what I want, and it is really not that bad.
T21 But I guess I heard you saying too, that it isn't only the children, but you don't like it as well when it isn't really ...
C22 Right. I'm sure that - I know that's it, probably even more so than I'm aware of. But I only notice it so much when I pick it up in the children. Then I can also notice it in myself. (Touches her face.)
T22 And somehow, sometimes, you kind of uh, feel like blaming them for the feelings you have. I mean, why should they cut you out from a normal sex life, huh?
C23 Well, a sex life, I could say, not normal because there is something about me that says that's not very healthy ¨C to uh just go into sex because you feel physically attracted or something, or a physical need. So, something about it tells me that that's not quite right anyway. (Still touching her face.)
T23 Mhm. (Pause) But you feel, really, that at times you¡¯re acting in ways that are not in accord with your own inner standards.
C24 Right. Right.
T24 But then you were also saying, a minute ago, that you feel you can't help that uh- either.
C25 I wish I could. That's it, and I can't - now I feel like I- I can't control myself as well as I could have before. For a specific reason now, I can't. I just let go and I have- there¡¯s too many things I do wrong that I have to feel guilty for, and I sure don't like that. I want you very much to give me a direct answer, and I'm going to ask it, and I don't expect a direct answer, (Smiles.) but I want to know. Do you feel that - to me the most important thing is to be open and honest and if I can be
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 9

open and honest with my children, do you feel that it could harm them? If for example, I could say to Pammy, "I was- I felt bad lying to you, Pammy, and I want to tell you the truth now," and if I tell her the truth and she¡¯s shocked at me and she¡¯s upset, that that could bother her more? I was- I want to get rid of my guilts and that will help me, but I don't want to put ¡®em on her. (Points away from herself.)
T25 That's right.
C26 Do you feel that that could hurt her?
T26 That¡¯s a real concern. I guess uh - I am sure this will sound evasive to you, but it seems to me that perhaps the person you are not being uh fully honest with is you? (C: Sure) Because I was very much struck by the fact that you were saying, "If I feel all right about what I have done, whether it's going to bed with a man or what, if I really feel all right about it, then I do not have any concern about what I would tell Pam or my relationship with her." (Shakes head.)
C27 Right. All right. Now I hear what you are sayin¡¯. (Sighs) (Shifts back and forth in chair.) Then all right, then I want to work on (T: It¡¯s kind of tough, huh?) -- I wanna work on accepting me, then. I want to work on feeling all right about it. But that makes sense. That that will come natural and then I won't have to worry about Pammy. (T: Mhm.) But when things do seem so wrong for me and I have an impulse to do them, how can I accept that?
T27 What you'd like to do is to feel more accepting toward yourself when you do things that you feel are wrong. Is that right?
C28 Right. And I feel like, I feel like...
T28 (Smiling) It sounds like a tough assignment.
C29 Yeah, I feel like you are going to say, "Now why do you think they¡¯re wrong?" and uh, I have mixed feelings there too. (T: Mhm) Through therapy I will say, "Now look, I know this is natural. Women feel it - sure, we don't talk about it lots socially but all women feel it and it's very natural." I have had sex for the last 11 years and I¡¯m- of course going to want it, but I still think it is wrong unless you¡¯re really, truly in love with a man, and my body doesn't seem to agree. And so I don't know how to accept it.
T29 It sounds like a triangle to me, isn't it? You feel that I, or therapists in general, or other people say, "It is all right, it is all right, it¡¯s natural enough, go ahead." Um, and I guess you feel your body sort of lines up on that side of the picture. (Points to C. ) But something in you says, "But I don't like it that way, not unless it¡¯s really right."
C30 Right. (Long Pause) (Sighs, then speaks in a slower, somber way.) Well, I have a Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 10

hopeless feeling. (T: Mhm) I mean, these are all the things that I sort of feel myself, and I feel uh - O.K., now what?
T30 Mhm. You feel this is the conflict and it's just insoluble, and therefore it is hopeless, and here you look to me and I don't seem to give you any help and that uh-
C31 Right. I uh- I really know you can't answer for me, and I have to figure it out myself, but I want you to guide me or show me where to start or - so it won't look so hopeless. I know I can keep living with this conflict and I know eventually things would work out, but I'd like feeling more comfortable with the way I live ¨C (T: Mhm, mhm.) and I'm not.
T31 One thing I might ask, what is it you wish I would say to you?
C32 I wish you would say to me (Smiles): to be honest and take the risk that Pammy¡¯s going to accept me. And I also have a feeling if I could really risk it with Pammy, of all people, that I'd be able to say, "Here's this little kid that can accept me, and I'm really not that bad." If she really knows what a demon I am and still loves me and accepts me, it seems like it would help me to accept me more - like it's really not that bad. (T: Mhm) I want you to say to go ahead and be honest, but I don't want the responsibility that it would upset her. (T: I see.) That is where I don't want to take responsibility.
T32 So you know, yeah - You know very well what you'd like to do in the relationship. You would like to be yourself and you'd like to have her know that you're not perfect and do things that maybe even she wouldn't approve of, and that you disapprove of to some degree yourself, but that uh- somehow she would love you and accept you as an imperfect person.
C33 Yes. Like I wonder if my mother had been more open with me, maybe I wouldn't have had such a narrow attitude about sex. If I would have thought that she could be, you know, pretty sexy and ornery, and devilish too, that I wouldn't look at her as being such a sweet mother, that she could also be the other side. But she didn't talk about that. (Shakes her head.) (T: Mhm) Maybe that's where I got my picture. I don't know, but I want Pammy to see me as a full woman, but also accept me.
T33 You don't sound so uncertain.
C34 I don't? (Tilts head and smiles.) What do you mean?
T34 What I mean is you have been sitting there telling me just what you would like to do in that relationship with Pam.
C35 (Appears confused.) I would, but I don't want to quite take the risk of doing it (T: I can understand) unless an authority tells me that ...
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 11

T35 (Eyes moistening, hands clasped.) It¡¯s, I guess one thing that I feel very keenly is that it's an awful risky thing to live. (Pause) (Hands unclasp.) You'd be taking a chance on your relationship with her and taking a chance on letting her know who you are, really.
C36 (Pause) Yeah. But then if I don't take the chance, if I feel loved and accepted by her, I'll never feel good about it anyway.
T36 Mhm. Mhm. If her love and acceptance of you is based on a false picture of you, what the hell is the good of that? Is that- is that what you are saying?
C37 Yeah, that¡¯s what I mean, yes. But I also feel there is a lot of responsibility with being a mother. With I don¡¯t- I don't want to feel like I have caused any big traumas in the children. I don't like all that responsibility. I think that's it. I don't like it, feeling it could be my fault.
T37 Mhm. I guess that's what I meant when I said, "Life is risky." It¡¯s uh- to take the responsibility for being the person you would like to be with her is a hell of a responsibility.
C38 It is.
T38 A very frightening one.
C39 And you know, I- I look at it two ways. I like to see myself as being so honest with the kids, and really being proud of myself so that no matter what I told them or no matter how bad they think I was, I was honest (points at herself) (T: Mhm) and down deep it¡¯s gonna be a much more wholesome relationship, and yet you know, I get jealous of like when they are with their daddy. I feel he¡¯s more flip, he¡¯s not quite as real, he¡¯s not quite as honest, but nevertheless, they see a sweet picture of their dad. You know, he is all goodness and light, and I am envious of that too. I want them to see me just as sweet as they see him and yet I know he is not quite as real with them. So it seems like I've got to swap the one for the other, and I know this is really what I want the most, but uh, I miss some of that glory.
T39 Yeah. You sort of feel, ¡°I want them to have just as nice a picture of me as they have of their dad, (C: I do. Right) and if his is a little phony, then maybe mine will have to be too.¡± I think that's putting it a little too strongly, but-
C40 But that¡¯s close. That is what I mean. So uh- But I know she can't have that neat a picture of me, if I were honest. (Big smile) (T: Laughs) Besides that, I do feel that I¡¯m a little more ornery than their dad anyway. So I'm likely to do more things that they¡¯d disapprove of.
T40 Sounds like you really find it quite hard to believe that they would really love you if they knew you?
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 12

C41 That's right. You know that's exactly it. Before therapy, I would have definitely chosen the other area. I¡¯m going to get respect from them no matter what - even if I have to lie.
T41 I see.
C42 But right now, I know that's not true (T: Mhm, mhm) and I'm not positive they'll truly accept me. Something tells me they will. I know they will, but I am not positive. I want reassurance. I keep wanting these things.
T42 And now you are kind of in a no-man's-land of probably shifting from one point of view toward them to another, but boy you'd sure like somebody to say, "That's right, you go ahead and do it." (Gestures to sides.)
C43 Yes. Yes. That's why I get encouraged when I read in a book from somebody I respect and admire, that this is the right thing no matter what - honesty will win out. Well then, that keeps giving me confidence. ¡°By gosh, I'm right.¡± But I ...
T43 It is so damned hard to really choose something on your own, isn't it?
C44 Which makes me feel rea- very immature. I don't like this in me. I wish I were grown up enough or mature enough to make my decisions and stick by them, but I need somebody to help me on - somebody to push me.
T44 So that you kind of reproach yourself for that, I guess. And feel, "Why, if I was anybody, or if I was grown up, I'd be mature enough to decide things like this for myself."
C45 Right. Right. And take more risks. I wish I¡¯d take more risks. I wish that I could just go ahead and be this and say, however the children grow up, I've done my best. I didn¡¯t have to constantly have this conflict. And I'd like, in later years, to say, "No matter what you asked me kids, at least I told you the truth. You may not have liked it, but it's been the truth." (Camera pans towards hands.) That, somehow, I can admire. (T: Mhm.) I- I disrespect people that lie. I hate it so, you see what a double bind I am in. I hate myself if I'm bad, but I also hate myself if I lie. So uh, it's accepting. I want to become more accepting.
T45 I guess, judging from your tone of voice, you sound as though you hate yourself more when you lie than you do in terms of things you disapprove of in behavior.
C46 I do. I do because this has really bothered me. This happened with Pammy about a month ago and it keeps coming to my mind. I don't know whether to go back and talk to her about it or wait. She may have even forgotten what she asked me, but uh ¨C it just-
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 13

T46 The point is, you haven't forgotten.
C47 I haven... No, I haven't. And I would like, at least, to be able to tell her that I remember lying and I am sorry I lied and it has been driving me bugs because I did. (Pause) I do- Now I feel like - now that's solved - and I didn't even solve a thing, but I feel relieved. (T: Mhm, Mhm.) I uh- I do feel like you have been saying to me ¨C you¡¯re not say- giving me advice, but I do feel like you are saying, "You really wanna- You know what pattern you want to follow Gloria, and go ahead and follow it." I sort of feel a backing up from you.
T47 I guess the way I sense it is uh, you've been telling me that you know what you want to do and yes, I do believe in backing up people in what they want to do. It¡¯s just a little different slant than the way it seems to you.
C48 Are you telling me...
T48 You see, one thing that concerns me is uh,.. It's no damn good you¡¯re doing something that you haven't really chosen to do. That¡¯s why I am trying to help you find out what your own inner choices are.
C49 But then there's also a conflict there because I am not really positive what I wanna do. The lying part, yes, but I am not positive what I wanna do when I go against myself. (T: Sure) Like when I bring a man to the house. I am not sure I want to do that. If I feel guilty afterward, I must not have really wanted to.
T49 And I am interested that you say - I'm not just sure which words you used - but you don¡¯t want- you don¡¯t like yourself or don't approve of it when you do something against yourself. (C: Hand to her face.)
C50 Yes. You know, this is so different. Now this kind of thing we are talking about now, it isn't just knowing whether you want to do something or not. If I want to go to work in the morning or if I don't want to go to work, that's easy. (Both hands palms up.) But when I find myself doing something I don't feel comfortable with, I automatically say, "If you¡¯re not comfortable Gloria, it¡¯s not right. Something¡¯s wrong." All right now. What I want to ask you is, how can I know which is the strongest? Because I do it, does that mean that¡¯s the strongest? And yet, if I disapproved, that's just part of the thing that¡¯s got to go along with it? You see, it sounds like you... (Points at self with both hands.) I'm picking up a contradiction. I¡¯m not under- I¡¯m not following.
T50 It sounds like you¡¯re feeling a contradiction in yourself too, although you- what I heard you saying in part is uh, the way you like it is when you feel really comfortable about what you are doing.
C51 Yes, and I have at times, when I¡¯ve made a decision. Now that seems right. (T: Mhm) That seems perfectly right - no conflict - but then there are times I do things
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 14

that I feel uncomfortable with. So that there is a conflict there. (T: Mhm) It's not the same at all. So, what I'm saying is, how do I really know when I am following my true feelings, if I have conflicts afterwards or guilt afterwards?
T51 I see. Because in the moment, it may seem like your true feelings.
C52 Yes. Like if I¡¯m starting to do it -- O.K.
T52 Mhm. Mhm. So that really is tough ah ... When if you feel comfortable in the moment about it, but then afterwards don't feel at all comfortable, which course of action was really the one you should have followed?
C53 You know, the most outstanding thing - I don't know if you are following me, when I say about this conflict - the one thing I know is I¡¯ve wanted, for example, to leave my husband for quite a few years. I never did it. I kept thinking how nice it would be, or how scary it would be, but I never did it. And all of a sudden when I did, it felt right. I didn't feel mean toward him. I just knew this was what I had to do. That's when I know I am following myself. I am following my feelings completely. I have no conflict there. Some unhappy things came from it (T: sure), but I still have no conflict. That, to me, is when I am following my feelings. And in everyday life the small little decisions, the small little things to do don't come out that clear at all. So many conflicts come with them. (T: Mhm, that¡¯s right) Is this natural? (Knits eyebrows.)
T53 Although you are saying ¨C uh, I expect it is ¨C but, but you¡¯re saying too that you know perfectly well the feeling within yourself that occurs when you are really doing something that's right for you.
C54 I do. I do. (Face relaxes.) And I miss that feeling other times. And it's right away a clue to me.
T54 Mhm. You can really listen to yourself sometimes and realize, "Oh no, this isn't the right feeling. This isn't ¨C this isn¡¯t the way I would feel if I was doing what I really wanted to do."
C55 But yet, many times I will go along and do it anyway. And say, "Oh well, I'm in the situation now, I'll just remember next time." I mentioned this word a lot in therapy and most therapists grin at me or giggle or something when I say "utopia," but when I do follow a feeling and I feel this good feeling inside of me, that's sort of utopia. That's what I mean. That's the way I like to feel whether it's a bad thing or a good thing. But I feel right about me. This is what I wanna...
T55 I, I sense that in those utopian moments, you really feel kind of whole. You feel all in one piece.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 15

C56 Yes. Yeah, it gives me a choked up feeling when you say that because I don't get that as often as I'd like. (Smiles.) I like that whole feeling. That's real precious to me. (Touches her face.)
T56 I expect none of us get it as often as we'd like, but I really do understand it. (Pause) (C: Tears come to her eyes.) Mhm, that really does touch you, doesn't it?
C57 Yeah, and you know what else I was just thinking? I ¨C I feel dumb saying it uh - that all of a sudden while I was talking to you I thought, "Gee, how nice I can talk to you and I want you to approve of me and I respect you, but I miss that my father couldn't talk to me like you are." (Touches her chin.) I mean, I'd like to say, "Gee, I'd like you for my father." (T: Mhm, Mhm, Mhm) I don't even know why that came to me. (Smiles)
T57 You look to me like a pretty nice daughter. (Pause) (C: Looks down.) But you really do miss the fact that you- you couldn't be open with your own dad.
C58 Yeah, I couldn't be open, but I, I wanna blame it on him. I think I¡¯m more open than he'd allow me. He would never listen to me talk like you are and not disapprove, not lower me down. I thought of this the other day. Why do I always have to be so perfect? I know why. He always wanted me to be perfect. I always had to be better (touches her lips) and uh... yeah, I miss that.
T58 You were just trying like hell to be the girl he wanted you to be. C59 Yet at the same time, rebelling.
T59 That's right. Sure. (Nods)
C60 (Gesturing with left hand from the side of her head.) Like I almost gloated writing him a letter the other day and telling him I am a waitress, which I expect him to disapprove of. I go out at nights and I almost gloated hitting him back - like, "Now how do you like me?" (T: Uh-huh, Uh-huh) And yet, I really want acceptance and love from him. I mean, I know he loves me.
T60 So you slap at him and say, "This is what I am, now see."
C61 Yeah. (T: But you- yeah) "You raised me, how do you like it?" But do you know what I want him to say? "I knew this was you all along, honey, and I really love you." (Wipes a tear with finger.)
T61 Oh, I see. You really feel badly that you think there is very little chance he will say that.
C62 No. He won't. He doesn't hear. (Her voice sad and resigned.) I went back home to him about two years ago, really wanting to let him know I loved him although I¡¯ve
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 16

been afraid of him. And he doesn't hear me. He just keeps saying things like, "Honey, you know I love you. You know I have always loved you." He doesn't hear. (Her eyes moisten.)
T62 That was... He¡¯s never really known you and loved you and this, somehow, is what brings the tears inside.
C63 I don't know what it is. You know, when I talk about it, it feels more flip. If I just sit still a minute, it feels like a great big hurt down there. That I uh, feel cheated. (Reaches for kleenex, wipes her eye.)
T63 Mhm. Mhm. It is much eas... It¡¯s much easier to uh be a little flip, because then you don't feel that big lump inside of hurt.
C64 Mhm. (Nodding) And again, that's a hopeless situation. I tried working on it, and uh, I feel it's something I have to accept. My father just isn't the type of man I'd really like. I'd like somebody more understanding and caring. He cares, but not in the way that we can cooperate or communicate.
T64 Mhm. You feel ¡°nope¡± that, "I am permanently cheated."
C65 Mhm. That is why I like substitutes. Like I like talking to you and I like men that I can respect. Doctors, and I keep sort of maybe underneath a feeling like we¡¯re real close, you know, and it¡¯s sort of like a substitute father.
T65 I don't feel that's pretending.
C66 Well, you are not really my father (laughs). (Raises her eyebrows.)
T66 No, I meant about the real close business.
C67 Well, see, I sort of feel that's pretending too, because I can't expect you to feel very close to me. You don't know me that well. (Fingering kleenex.)
T67 Well, all I can do is what I am feeling- that is I feel close to you in this moment. (Long Pause.)
C68 [The remainder is not on the film ¨C only on audio recording] Well, O.K., I'd just like more of it I guess.
T68 Do you feel as though that's a big need, that it would take a lot of caring and a lot of understanding to fill it up?
C69 Exactly. And I have been so busy trying to get rid of my neurosis. I'd like to have this one neurosis filled. I'd like to just find someone who is going to love me like a father. I even want this in boyfriends. I always want to get an older man that's
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 17

caring and more mature and not so flip.
T69 One of the things you really deeply want is to find a father whom you would love and respect and who would really like you as you are, and not to just like perfection.
C70 That's right. And it seems ironic that since I have been away from my husband, the only type of man I go out with are the kind I don't respect - are the young, flip, not caring, 'smart aleck' kind of guy. Not somebody that's really, you know, that I can respect. That seems like such a big thing.
T70 The phrase that comes to my mind - I don't know if it is appropriate or not - you're slapping your father in the face, aren't you?
C71 Oh? By wanting mature men?
T71 No. By going out with those who are quite unlike the ones you'd really want. C72 But I don't mean to. I don't understand why they keep coming around.
END of FILM and AUDIORECORDING
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Interview, page 18

Rogers¡¯ Post-Session Commentary
In spite of feeling initially the artificiality of the situation, particularly the hot lights, I
very quickly became oblivious to the outside situation, and I think that Gloria did too. In many ways I'm glad that she kept pushing me for an answer to her very personal questions about her sex life and her relationship to her daughter. I say I'm glad of this because as the relationship developed, it became I think completely clear to her as well as to me that she was seeking something a good deal deeper than that. Incidentally, I'd like to pay my tribute to her deep honesty in being willing to talk about herself so freely.
Although every individual is entirely unique, and in this respect I was definitely unprepared for and sometimes surprised by the material she brought up - still, in another sense, this was very typical of my experiences in therapy. When I am able really to let myself enter into a relationship, and I feel that this was true in this instance, then I find myself not only being increasingly moved by being in touch with the inner world of my client, but I find myself bringing out my own inner experience, statements which seem to have no connection with what's going on, but which usually prove to be, or prove to have, a very significant relationship to what the client is experiencing. I felt there were one o two incidents of this kind in this brief interview.
I was genuinely moved, I probably showed it, by the fact that she told me near the end of the contact that, uh, she saw me as the father she would like to have. My reply was also a thoroughly spontaneous one that she seemed to me like a pretty nice daughter. I guess I feel that we're only playing with the real world of relationships when we talk about such an experience in terms of transference and counter-transference. I feel quite deeply about that. I want to say, yes, we can put this experience into some such highly intellectualized framework, but when we do
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Post-Session Commentary, page 19

that it completely misses the point of the very immediate "I-Thou" quality of the relationship at such moments. I felt that Gloria and I really encountered each other and that in some small but, I believe, lasting way, we were each of us enriched by the experience. I am saying these things almost immediately after the conclusion of the interview and as is characteristic of me, there are not more than one or two statements or incidents which I recall from the interview. I simply know that I was very much present in the relationship, that I lived it in the moment of its occurrence, and I realize that after a time I may begin to remember it too. But at the present time, I really have a very non-specific memory of the whole interview. I'll try to look at it, though, a little bit more from an intellectual rather than a strictly feeling point of view. Gloria showed what I have come to feel are characteristic elements of therapeutic movement. In the first part of the interview, she was talking about her feelings and they were past feelings.. She was talking about aspects of her behavior and of herself as if she didn't quite own them. She was looking outside herself for a center, or a locus of evaluation, some source of authority. She saw some of the things she was talking about in fairly black and white fashion. By the end of the interview, she was experiencing her feelings in the immediate moment, not only as evidenced by her tears, but by her ability to express very directly and with immediacy her feelings toward me. She was also much more aware of her ability to make her own judgments and choices. I guess, put in terms that have become somewhat commonplace, you could say that she moved from the "there and then" of her life to the "here and now" of elements that she was discovering in herself feelings which she was experiencing in the moment in her relationship with me. All in all, I feel good about the interview. I guess I feel good about myself in the interview and like Gloria, I feel very real regret that the relationship cannot continue.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Gloria Post-Session Commentary, page 20

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
In this interview the responses of the therapist (C) (Carl Rogers), and the client (S) (Sylvia) are numbered for easy reference.
 Carl Rogers 4th Interview with Sylvia1 - 1975
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (1975). Carl Rogers¡¯ 4th Interview with Sylvia [Film].]
After filming, comments by Sylvia and Rogers were inserted. The bracketed italicized dialogue indicates the voiced over comments.
[Carl Rogers: This is my fourth interview with Sylvia. A year previous, Sylvia had been a member of a workshop in which I offered to put on a demonstration interview. I asked for volunteers and she was the first one to volunteer. In front of that workshop audience, I held three interviews with Sylvia. Then a year, uh, intervened before this fourth interview. The interview will be, uh, shown as it was recorded, but with, uh, comments both from Sylvia and from myself, at points where we felt we wished to clarify what was going on, uh, or to, to, uh, make some comment about what was going on.]
Carl: Hi.
Sylvia: Hi Carl. (They both sit down, facing each other.)
C: Good to see ya.
S 1: I¡¯ve been looking forward to this moment.
C 1: Well, I¡¯m eager to know what¡¯s what with you.
S 2: (Looks down.) (Pause 8 seconds.) (Leans back.) Well, do you mean in terms of the
past year or right now?
1 This Sylvia, in session #4, is the same person as the client in the film ¡°The Struggle for Self-Acceptance¡± - session #5 with Sylvia.
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 21

C 2: Oh, right now, whatever your concerns are in your present life. (S: Mhm hm) I guess that¡¯s what I¡¯m interested in.
S 2: Well, um, (smiles) I come here with an agenda, (C: Okay.) like, of a particular thing I¡¯d like to discuss with you. (C: All right.) And, and I think that discussing it will be helpful in terms of my, of my life.
C 2: Uh-huh. Then that¡¯s what I¡¯d like you to discuss.
S 3: Well, I think I¡¯m doing very well in many ways, and I need to do some work,
(C: M-hm.) too. (C: M-hm.) And, uh, the most pressing thing with me is that I plan to go to work in the fall, (C: Nods.) full-time, (C: Nods.) and have the care of both of my sons. (C: Nods.) Without any support other than what I¡¯m earning. (4 second pause.) And I, and I, I don¡¯t feel very upset about it, but I believe that deep down in my body I¡¯m really afraid. (Smiles.)
C 3: Are you afraid of the responsibility or, or what aspect of it is most frightening? S 4: Well what, what seems most frightening as I think about it is coming home from
work very tired (C: M-hm.) and having, um, two little boys that need a lot. (C: M-
hm.) (Her voice quivers.)
C 4: Will you really be able to be a mother to them when they, (hands Sylvia tissue box.)
when you come home from work. Hmmm?
S 5: Well, I¡¯m sure I can do it (gets teary) because I, it¡¯s done every day. And, uh, the
women I know an... who are trying to do that are having a really hard time. (C: M- hm.) (3 seconds pause.) And I¡¯ve been thinking about talking about this problem now with you. I haven¡¯t really... I, I talk about in a heady way with my friends, and, uh, I haven¡¯t given myself any real support (C: M-hm.) with it. It¡¯s a real fear I
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 22

have, and it¡¯ll probably be really hard. (C: M-hm.)
[Carl: It¡¯s interesting that, uh, because she had saved up this problem to talk about that the moment she begins to talk about it she begins to, to, uh, get teary - that¡¯s why I reached for the, uh, Kleenex, which she didn¡¯t use. But, uh, it¡¯s evident that, uh, though she may have talked about it in a, in an intellectual fashion to her friends, uh, it really does have a lot of emotional import for her.]
[Sylvia: Well, I, I don¡¯t know if it¡¯s obvious to you but I started to cry when I said that and you know why, you know, I was feeling a lot of sadness.]
C 5: (Talking at the same time) And you haven¡¯t really had a chance to explore it in, in
depth; you¡¯ve talked about it more on a, on the surface level.
S 5: Well, the exploring I¡¯ve done is... (3 seconds pause) I decided for myself- well
simple, I¡¯ll look for other single working mothers (C: Nods.) with young children who are doing well. (C: M-hm.) And I¡¯ll talk to them and see what they do. (C: M- hm.) So I started asking, asking my friends, asking some people I know, ¡°Do you know of this kind of person?¡± Well after about a month, (quiet laugh) I didn¡¯t come up with one, (C: Is that right?) one single woman taking care of young children and working full-time who was doing very well (C: Nods.) and that scared me.
C 6: So the track record, the track record that the other people have, the other women have makes you really concerned about will you be able to do it?
S 7: Well that substantiates my concern.
C 8: Yeah. Yeah.
S 9: I¡¯ve had the concern. (C: Yeah. M-hm.) (Pause 8 seconds.) (C: M-hm.) I wish,
(smiles.) I keep wishing I could find some secrets to make it easier for myself. And Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 23

the only secrets I can come up with are working half-time (C: Nods.) and being really, like, no... (C: M-hm.) just barely, you know, paying rent and (C: M-hm.) food and so forth and so on. (C: Mhm.) But, I do know how to do that (pauses) and that may be what I decide to do.
C 9: It¡¯s one possible option at any rate. Mhm.
S 10: But it seems like a real limited lifestyle.
C 10: It is clear to me from the, from the tears that came up the first that, that, uh, this is
something you feel a lot of concern about, isn¡¯t it?
S 11: Oh, I feel I¡¯m two things (crying). All alone (C: Mhm.) and somewhat doomed to
fail.
[Carl: I think, at this part, she was feeling, um, uh, quite discouraged after following a very good plan. Some of the responses along here are almost mechanical, like, um, my saying that¡¯s another option. But then when I do pick up on the, uh, feeling that she had exhibited at the first, it, uh, brings up fresh all of the feeling that¡¯s, uh, stirred up around that. And, uh, I think my response shows that I¡¯m doing what I, what I customarily try to do. It is to live in the client¡¯s experience and to feel whatever she¡¯s feeling. This is the important thing to really go with the client into whatever feelings there are. And here I really go with her into her sadness. At times I, uh, feel almost as though I¡¯m speaking for the client. And to me that¡¯s, um, the relationship is good at those times. I feel as though, uh, I¡¯m in the client¡¯s world. I¡¯m saying things that she could be saying. And, uh, when she says, ¡°That¡¯s right¡± it shows I have been right where she¡¯s experiencing it.]
C 11: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.
S 12: And, uh, (clears throat) doomed to fail, not that I will die or (C: Mhm.) anything. I
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 24

think doomed to fail and to be there for my children (C: Mhm. Mhm.) in a positive, cheerful, (C: Mhm.) warm, loving way. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) And being a single parent, like I will be (C: Mhm.) their support system to a large extent. (C: Mhm.) And it scares me to think of their main support as being exhausted (C: Mhm.) and irritated (C: Mhm.) and (C: Mhm.) ... (3 seconds pause.)
C 13: You just feel, ¡°I may not be able to make it. I may be doomed (Sylvia smiles and nods.) to failure by the very circumstances.¡±
S 14: Right. (Nods.) (C: Mhm.) (10 second pause.) And talking about it this way I feel two ways: Like, ¡°Oh c¡¯mon Sylvia. Everybody else is doing it too.¡± And on the other hand, like, you¡¯re willing to sit here and talk (laughs) about it with me (C: Mhm.) and I appreciate that. (Voice breaks.)
C 14: Mhm. Mhm. But you don¡¯t have to just tell yourself, ¡°Oh, buck up, you can do it.¡± It¡¯s, it gives you a good chance to really...
S 15: (Takes Kleenex and wipes eyes.) Right. Well, I do do that, ¡°Buck up, you can do it.¡± I¡¯ll do that plenty. But I don¡¯t get much opportunity to, (C: Nods.) to be sad with somebody about it. (C: Yeah.) How hard it (C: Yeah.) seems. (Crying.)
C 15: Yeah. Yeah. That¡¯s the thing isn¡¯t it? That to be all alone, with no support from anybody, it sounds like...
S 16: Well, I mean (C: I mean...) there are people that (C: Yeah, I know but...) care about me. (C: But...) There¡¯s, like, no financial (C: Yeah.) support. (C: Mhm.) And it¡¯s not like I¡¯ll have my mother next door, (C: Mhm.) or something like that.
C 16: You¡¯ll be alone with a heavy burden and it is a sad prospect really.
S 17: (Nods head.) (Pause 3 seconds.) It feels sad. (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) And I get...
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 25

when I, (pauses) I depress myself by thinking, ¡°Well, oh, sure I can give up my children.¡± And I think, ¡°Well, I won¡¯t do that.¡± Um, I¡¯m seeing it as a black or white thing (C: Mhm.) and I know that¡¯s not reality.
C 17: (Nods.) But it feels like reality. That either you¡¯d have to give up your children or, or else (S: Mhm.) make a go of it.
S 18: But then I also feel suspicious of myself. Like, ¡°Well, Sylvia, you¡¯re used to so much of getting your needs met.¡± Like, going out at night sometimes, (C: Mhm.) um, having friends, (C: Mhm.) and, and having a social life and not being overtired. (C: Mhm.) And then I see myself as pampered. (C: Nods and smiles.) And, uh, if I just wasn¡¯t so pampered, (laughs) things would be a lot better.
C 18: That¡¯s when you kind of scold yourself, (: Uh-huh.) really. Mhm. Mhm. Mhm. (pause 7 seconds) So that you really feel you¡¯re gonna be hemmed in by that. I mean, your life is gonna be constricted (S: Mhm.) a good deal. A lot of the things you¡¯ve been used to you just won¡¯t have.
S 19: And want for myself.
C 19: And want for yourself. (S: Nods.) Uh-huh.
S 20: Yeah, that¡¯s right.
C 20: So really it does look like a very tough period, doesn¡¯t it?
S 21: Yep. It does. (pause 13 seconds) But, I like being able to be sad and complain about
how terrible I¡¯m afraid it¡¯s going to be then I can... like now I¡¯m feeling like, and
I¡¯m excited too, you know, about facing it.
C 21: Sort of a new phase of your life? Is it... it has excitement as well as dread in it, I
guess.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 26

S 21: (Nods.) Yeah about seeing what it will be like, (C: Mhm.) in fact. (C: Mhm.) (Sighs).
[Sylvia: I smiled (C: Mhm .) a little bit there and I think that I was feeling like a relief of tension or, um, I don¡¯t know how to describe it but a relief of, of after crying and feeling sad and then having that feeling pass (C: Mhm. to something else.]
[Carl: It¡¯s, uh, it¡¯s very often true that if, uh, I go with a client into sad or desperate or negative feelings that (clears throat) then that satisfies that aspect of their experience and then they can move on to something else. So that it¡¯s very common to have positive feelings, uh, follow, uh, very, uh, negative ones. Also I might just comment here that, uh, these pauses seemed very brief to me, uh, but to some therapists, to some counselors, uh, a pause is very hard to bear. I don¡¯t find pauses hard to bear. This was her silence and I was willing to let her have it and to speak up when she was ready. During those pauses, I¡¯m very quiet inside. Um, I really am quite content to wait. Uh, sometimes I am reviewing what she has been experiencing. Um, but I¡¯m not, uh, I¡¯m not trying to look ahead, and I¡¯m not thinking about the process. I¡¯m just trying to feel it as it might be going on in her.]
C 21: It will be a new adventure but it¡¯s one that, uh, you feel different ways about. S 22: Mhm. Yeah. So that¡¯s, that¡¯s what I think about the most, in terms of a problem
area. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) Like, the (smiles) way I started crying it seemed like I just couldn¡¯t wait to get here and cry about it. (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) It was a little dramatic that way.
C 22: ¡®Cos it is...well, it is, it is a real sad prospect. And one, I guess, that you don¡¯t let out too much to other people, the sad side of it.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 27

S 23: Right, I don¡¯t do that (C: Nods.) very well. I, (C: Mhm.) I am busy being strong (C: Mhm.) unconsciously. Or I¡¯m also busy being depressed. (C: Mhm.) (Sylvia smiles) I¡¯ve learned well. I believe being sad and scared are more dealing with (C: Mhm. Mmm.) the problem.
C 23: Mhm. Yeah being, being frightened of what you¡¯re taking on and sad of what you¡¯re losing for yourself. (S: Nods.) Those are two very real (S: Hmm.) feelings. S 24: And I, (pauses) I also think that part of my fear and excitement is that I¡¯ll be doing
something different. Like, I¡¯ve never worked (C: Nods.) in, in my profession (C: Mhm. Mhm.) and been like a confident, (C: Mhm.) single woman with young children (C: Mhm.) who are doing well. (C: Mhm.) And it¡¯s like, um, that¡¯s what I want for myself. (C: Mhm.) (Sylvia laughs.)
C 24: It¡¯s a goal you¡¯ve been working toward. (S: Nods.) Mhm. (3 seconds pause.) I wonder sort of how do your children feel about this?
[Carl: Here I simply, um, followed my impulse because I found myself thinking about her children, I raised that question with her. Uh, whether that was a good move or not from a counseling point of view is, uh, hard to say until we see what happens next. You might think in viewing this that, uh, I had, uh, thought about what was going on and decided, ¡°Here¡¯s a, uh, here¡¯s a piece that¡¯s missing. Here¡¯s something she hasn¡¯t talked about.¡± Actually that¡¯s not the process that goes on in me. Uh, I try to be open to whatever wells up in me and to say that, to, to act more, uh, from my inner feelings then from, from thinking about the process.]
S 25: Well, my youngest son wants me to go work (C: Nods.) so that we can have more (C: Mhm.) money and so that he can have more spending money. And, uh, my
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 28

oldest son has not, at this time, agreed to live with me yet. (C: Mmm.) But I¡¯m preparing (C: Mhm.) with the hopes that he will at that time. (C: Mhm.) He is living with... he will be living with me the rest of the summer.
C 25: Mhm. So that¡¯s another new part of the...
S 26: And my oldest son and I have a very strained relationship. He hasn¡¯t been living
with me the last two years. And so that¡¯s gonna be another difficult part of what I¡¯m talking about (C: Mhm.) is, um, at the same time needing and wanting to improve my relationship with Senate (C: Mhm.) and hoping there¡¯ll be money for counseling. I¡¯m hoping (C: Mhm.) that we can do work with a third party or in (C: Mhm.) a, uh, family group of some sort (C: Mhm.) because I believe that we¡¯ll need help. (C: Mhm.) And, uh, so that¡¯s, that, that part of the fall or the coming year scares me too about feeling so alienated from Senate.
C 26: ¡°Will he, will he really accept me as a mother?¡±
[Sylvia: Well, he says, ¡°Will he really accept as a mother¡± to me that is showing me he is listening to what I¡¯m saying. (C: Mhm.) And that even, um, (pauses) I don¡¯t know if it was or not at that time but it could be very easily have been a, a helper to me to help me focus with what I was, um, wrestling with in terms of understanding or clarifying for myself what I was thinking about it.]
S 27: (Phone rings) As his mother, (C: Yeah.) as someone who loves him (C: Mhm.) and
cares about him.
C 27: So that¡¯s a concern to ya, too.
S 28: (Nods.) (3 seconds pause.) Mhm. And can we get along? Can we live together? We
haven¡¯t lived together, and he¡¯s lived in a very different lifestyle.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 29

C 28: ¡°Can we really form a relationship of the kind that both of us would like?¡±
S 29: Pardon?
C 29: Your asking yourself, ¡°Can we really form a relationship that both of us will like?¡± S 30: (Nods.) Mhm. Yeah, and be happy and, (C: Mhm.) yeah... (8 seconds pause.)
(Smiles.) That¡¯s an important... I hadn¡¯t thought of that on my own, but you mentioning my children (C: Mhm.) brings up the part about Senate, which is a very important part of what I think about. (C: Mhm.) And I¡¯m happy I¡¯ll have him with us (C: Nods.) during the summer and we¡¯ll be able to have time.
C 30: You can get a start on that. Mhm.
S 31: Mhm. Yeah. (C: Mhm.) When I¡¯m not working, (smiles and nods) for example.
(Pause 24 seconds.) Well, I felt awfully rigid about this upcoming filming. (C:
Nods.) I felt it in my body a lot. And I feel, I felt more relaxed since we started. C 31: Mhm. Mhm. (Pause 4 seconds.) It¡¯s a really difficult thing.
S 32: Mhm. (Pauses.) Right, and just the same it¡¯s exciting (C: Mhm.) to come (C:
Mhm.) on this trip and to see you again (C: Mhm.) and it¡¯s also frightening a lot. (C: Mhm.) Ya know, who¡¯s gonna see it? And what are they gonna think? (C: Mhm.) And what¡¯s it gonna look like? (C: Mhm.) Am I, am I being hard on myself or am I being good to myself? I don¡¯t know - to put myself in this position (C: Yeah.) is what I mean.
C 32: Yeah. (Pause.) You have quite a little of conflict about, ¡°Should I really be doing this? Who, who will see it? (S: Nods.) What will they say? Am I wise?¡±
S 33: Uh-huh. What¡¯s it gonna be? What¡¯s the finished project, gonna be? (C: Mhm.)
(Clears throat.) Will I ever see it? (C: Mhm.) (Both smile.) (10 second pause.) Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 30

[Sylvia: To put myself in a position, um, where I¡¯ll be... I was disclosing very private things about myself where other people, I have no idea who all, may be viewing this and making their own judgments, and, um, exposing myself, (clears throat) that seems hard and, uh, being good to myself, being willing to go through the hardness for the opportunity of learning and experience of Carl. That, I think, is being very good for myself.]
[Carl: Sylvia has been quite aware of the filming but has had what I believe is a very good attitude toward it. Uh, that she hopes that by being as natural as she can in the interviews, she¡¯ll be making a contribution to the counseling field. Both in the interviews a year ago and clearly in this interview, the relationship with me has been very important to Sylvia.]
C 33: (Pause 10 seconds.) Looks to me as though your eyes are saying something, but I
don¡¯t know what. (Smiles and laughs.)
S 34: Well, I¡¯m thinking about how moved I¡¯ve been when I¡¯ve heard your voice a few
times over the past year. (C: Hmm.) And now I¡¯m here. C 34: That made a...
S 35: I wanna take it in ¨C (C: Mhm.) being here.
C 35: Mhm. (Pause 3 seconds.) I guess you¡¯re saying that I mean a good deal to you.
S 36: Well, this time with you. (Nods.) Yes, you, mhm. (Smiles) (Pause 12 seconds) I¡¯m
thinking about what I want to talk about or I¡¯m feeling kind of empty right now
about talking. (Pause 5 seconds.)
C 36: Can you tell me what I do mean to you?
S 37: (Smiles.) Yes, I can. (Pause 8 seconds.) Well, (Pause 4 seconds) I think the best
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 31

thing that I like to think about you is that as I understand your writings, I have not read very much that you¡¯ve written, but that you have, that you live what you write about. And my understanding of a lot of popular writers are they write one thing and somehow they just don¡¯t quite live that. They live something very different. And so I think of you as, (laughs) um, (pauses) wonderful in that way and not, uh... (Pause 3 seconds.)
C 37: But what does that mean to you?
S 38: (Sighs.) (Pause 3 seconds.) Well that it¡¯s what I would like to be more: (C: Mhm.
Mhm.) to have values and be able to, to do them (pauses) and to live them.
C 38: (Pause 4 seconds.) You¡¯d like to have a good match between your life (S: Mhm.)
and what you believe (S: Mhm. Mhm.) and value.
S 39: (Pause 3 seconds.) And what I also sense about you is, uh, like ¡°patience¡± isn¡¯t the
right word, but I see you as being comfortable with yourself so much so that
whatever I or anyone else says or does, doesn¡¯t (pause 3 seconds) get you uptight. C 39: (Laughs.)
S 40: (Laughing.) And maybe it does. (C: Mhm.) Sometimes it probably does ¡®cause you¡¯re a human being.
C 40: It certainly does, that¡¯s right.
S 41: But it doesn¡¯t seem like it does (C: Mhm. Mhm.) too much.
[Carl: I really was not quite accepting of her, uh, of her feeling that, uh, in the relationship I clearly was not uptight. It strikes me that what she¡¯s saying here is, uh, practically a, uh, statement of the, uh, attitudes that, uh, we have found most effective in therapy. She¡¯s saying that she experiences me as being genuine. Uh, she experiences me
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 32

as caring about her. Uh, and I think it¡¯s quite clear that she feels that I understand her empathically. And those are the elements that, uh, both in experience and in research have shown up as being the most, uh, potent elements in a counseling relationship.]
S 42: And I like that. I would like to be more present (C: Nods.) and, and comfortable
with myself so that other people, including my children and so forth and so on, could do what they do, and that I could be able to be a source of support and not be personally threatened (C: Mhm. Mhm. Mhm.) by this little thing and that little thing.
C 42: And that, that has meaning to me. You¡¯d like to be sufficiently accepting of yourself, that then you can be comfortable with what your children do or what other people do (S: Nods.) and not, uh, (S: Mhm.) not feel frightened, (S: Hmm.) thrown off balance.
S 43: (Nods.) Mhm. And I¡¯ve enjoyed through the year in the few letters that I¡¯ve gotten from you, your warmth, and interest in me, in my life. I¡¯ve liked that a lot from (C: Mhm.) you. And at the time those letters were written we had no plans to (C: No.) make a movie (C: No.) or all that stuff so that was really enjoyable. (Pause 5 seconds.) Do you feel answered well?
C 43: Yeah. Mhm. Mhm. (Pause 15 seconds.) And I¡¯m interested enough in you to know of any other things in your life that are important to you or that, uh, that are difficult for ya, or whatever.
S 44: (Pause 15 seconds.) Well, I¡¯d like to go one of two ways. I don¡¯t know which yet. Uh, one way would be back to the single working mother business. I¡¯m not sure where we might go with that, but I know it¡¯s a big thing for me. And another way
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 33

would be to go with the difficulty I see myself in having with my relationships with men. (C: Mhm. Mmm.) (Pause 3 seconds.) I do so much analyzing (smiles) that I, I feel like throwing up my hands. ¡°What¡¯s the use of even talking about it?¡± But I...
C 44: But you do have (S: I...) difficulties in...
S 45: Yeah. I¡¯ll, I¡¯ll go with the men. (C: Okay.) And that¡¯s the most frightening thing
for me to talk about (C: Mhm.) on this film because people that I know will probably be seeing this (C: Mhm.) and men that I know. (4 second pause.) I see myself, uh, and this, this is real scattered in my mind. (Sighs.) Scattered, (smiles) and looking every which way. (C: Mhm.) Well, I see myself making acquaintance with men, many men, I mean not just one man (C: Mhm.) and spending some time with that person. And then, um, feeling that they lost interest in me or that I turned them off. And I tell myself things like, ¡°You can¡¯t expect every man you meet to fall in love with you.¡± (C: Mhm.) And, um, let¡¯s see, (smiles) what else? (C: But you feel that you...) Oh and then I¡¯ll tell myself all these reasonable... ¡°Of course this man doesn¡¯t like me because I¡¯m this and I¡¯m that and....¡± But, I don¡¯t very often feel the disappointment and confusion about ¡°Well I had a good time with that man.¡± And it seems to me like he must not have had a good time with me because I didn¡¯t hear from him again, or I did and things went such and such a way. And, uh...
C 45: Sounds like it seems kind of mysterious to you. (S: Uh-huh.) Why the men lose interest in you.
S 46: Uh-huh. And then I have feedback from one person, one man friend of mine, who Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 34

says that I create, ya know I turn people off, men, myself. And so it¡¯s like it¡¯s all, it¡¯s all my doing anyway. (C: Mhm.) But I have felt lately impotent about how to, (Pause 7 seconds.) how to have a successful long rel- long lasting relationship with a man. Successful, I don¡¯t mean perfect, I mean (C: Yeah. Mhm.) workable. (C: Mhm.) And, uh, I think workable is successful (C: Mhm.) these days. (Smiles.) Yeah.
C 46: Well, that¡¯s a part of your life in which you just haven¡¯t had the kind of, um, success that you wish you had had. Mhm. Mhm. An important lack in some way.
S 47: (Nods.) Now I¡¯m remembering we talked about this before.
C 47: A little bit.
S 48: A little bit, right. (Sighs.) (Pause 7 seconds.) And I do that, the kind of analyzing
that ¡®¡±Well I have all these habits like, uh, I, um, I like to be by myself, I¡¯m not real generous and outgoing (C: Nods.) and taking care of, of people that I meet.¡± And the woman that I live with says that she doesn¡¯t see me doing that at all like, ¡°Oh come in I¡¯ll fix you dinner, I¡¯ll do this, I¡¯ll do that.¡± Like I don¡¯t do that. (C: Nods) And, and so I¡¯m confused about do I need to do that to be in a close relationship? It doesn¡¯t seem to me like I should (C: Mhm.) need to sell out to be um enjoyed and wanted.
C 48: I gather what you mean by ¡°selling out¡± is that if you, if you really put yourself out in kind of an artificial way, you don¡¯t want that. Is that what you¡¯re saying?
[Carl: This is a good example of a client experiencing confusion. And, uh, she tries to be,
to talk about it rationally. But it¡¯s clear that what she is experiencing is just confusion itself. I feel this could have been a better response had I really heard her feeling that she
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 35

is powerless in, her, uh, relationships with men that she simply doesn¡¯t have what it takes to build a workable relationship. I believe this feeling that, uh, ¡°I have some fundamental lack in myself¡± is one of the commonest feelings that one meets in counseling situations. Almost all of us at times feel ¡°there must be some terrible flaw in me or I wouldn¡¯t have such problems in my life.¡±]
S 49: Yes, if I do all these things for a man, so then he¡¯ll want me.
C 49: Mhm. Kind of buying his favor, (S: Nods. Mhm.) as it were. And you just don¡¯t
see yourself doing that. Don¡¯t wanna do that.
S 50: Or wanting to do it. (C: Mhm. Mhm.) (S: Nods.) And then I... another question,
hard question, I ask myself is, ¡°Well, I¡¯m choosing men to relate to that don¡¯t know how to give in the way that I want to be given to.¡± (C: Mhm. Mhm.) And then I try (smiles) to figure that one out. (C: Mhm.) ¡°Oh simple, I¡¯m choosing, that just means I need to choose differently.¡± (C: Mhm.) And then I look around and it doesn¡¯t seem so simple.
C 50: Mhm. You say you¡¯re trying to analyze and analyze and analyze what, ¡°what lack in me?¡± or ¡°you know what lack in me?¡¯ I guess your asking yourself mostly, ¡°What lack in me keeps, (S: Hmm.) keeps me from having a lasting (S: Mhm.) relationship with men?¡±
S 51: And one thing that now I¡¯m recalling that really frightened me was I was talking- I lived with my husband for eight years (C: Nods.) and I felt rejected by him and I left him. (C: Nods.) And I left him for a man I was very much in love with that I¡¯ve been very close to (C: Mhm.) for five years. But he¡¯s also... like, I moved away from him but I felt left (smiles) by him also. And so this man friend of mine
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 36

said to me, ¡°Well, what¡¯s wrong with you that you can¡¯t keep a man?¡± And that, uh, that really scared me inside because when I look at the situation in a practical, sensible way that doesn¡¯t seem like reality. (C: Mhm.) But then I don¡¯t know maybe it¡¯s true.
C 51: But that her saying that (S: He.) he saying that, (S: Uh-huh.) uh, really does touch something in you. ¡°Is there something wrong with me (S: Uh-huh.) that I....¡°
S 52: That I don¡¯t see. (C: Mhm.) And, and, uh, just the fact that it touched me so much shows me that there¡¯s something there.
C 52: Mhm. It, (S: Sighs.) it wouldn¡¯t bother you that much, or you wouldn¡¯t think so much about it if there wasn¡¯t something in you that that refers to.
S 53: Mhm. (Nods.) And I, (sighs) I see my mother that way a lot, that my mother not being able to have a successful relationship with a man and so that¡¯s been my model and... (Pause 3 seconds) like, why can¡¯t...
C 53: You¡¯re saying, ¡°Maybe, maybe I¡¯m just following the same pattern as my mother.¡± S 54: Mhm. Well, I am in that respect and I don¡¯t like it. (C: Mhm.) And I¡¯m not willing
to do a bunch of crummy stuff that I... (C: Mhm.) (Pause 6 seconds.) So, right now (smiles) I¡¯m living alone (C: Mhm.) and I¡¯m not doing any crummy stuff. (C: Mhm.) And I also have some very nice relationships. It¡¯s (smiles) those shades of black and white. (Pause 8 seconds.) But I do feel a lot of confusion about building an intimate relationship. (C: Mhm.) A monogamous type (C: Mhm. Mhm.) or primary...
C 54: So you can have good times and all that, but still there is this nagging question or these nagging questions, ¡°Am I just following my mother¡¯s pattern?¡± ¡°What is
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 37

wrong with me that I don¡¯t have a permanent relationship with a man?¡±
[Sylvia: I don¡¯t ever recall feeling like Carl wasn¡¯t understanding me or... because if I did have that feeling there was something I could do about it right then and there in terms of helping him to better understand me, so then I did feel understood. His intention was to very much to be with me and, uh, if I got the sense that he wasn¡¯t that we could talk about that.]
[Carl: I think this interview is a good example of the fact that, uh, when the relationship is good, the client is able to take more and more risks. Sylvia begins with material which is quite present in her awareness, and yet by the end of the interview she is dipping into material which she doesn¡¯t understand, which she¡¯s a little bit fearful of expressing. Uh, She has gone several levels deeper during the interview and to me that¡¯s, uh, the mark of a process of therapy that in the long run will be successful. Perhaps through this whole interview, it¡¯s evident that, uh, following the client¡¯s experiencing, being a companion to the client in whatever, uh, is going on in her does lead to opening up new, uh, areas of concern, new explorations, leads her into new, uh, territories.]
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 4th Interview, page 38

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
In this interview the responses of the therapist (C) (Carl Rogers), and the client (S) (Sylvia) are numbered for easy reference.
 Carl Rogers Demonstrates Client-Centered Therapy Transcription from the Video of the Film "Struggle for Acceptance¡±
Session 5 with Sylvia - 1975
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (1975). The struggle for self-acceptance.]
[Commentaries are typed in brackets and italics to distinguish from the actual interview.]
Carl Commentary 1: [This is my fifth interview with Sylvia. The fourth interview had been held on the previous day. Prior to that there had been the three interviews a year earlier. The interview will be shown as it was recorded, but with comments both from Sylvia and from myself at points where we felt we wished to clarify what was going on,uh, or to make some comment about what was going on.]
Carl: Well, where would you like to start this morning?
Sylvia1: Well, uh, I want to tell you about something that I've been thinking about and that¡¯s it's a, a sharing more than (C: M-hm.) telling you a problem. (C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 2: [So often clients and counselors get the feeling that, uh, the relationship is one which must be filled only with problems. Uh, Sylvia gives a little indication of that, this is just a sharing, it's not a problem.]
S1 (continued): And that is I¡¯ve just recently noticed in myself that I've been learning. (She laughs a little.) (C: M-hm.) And that's a big deal. Uh, I hear people say all the time, ¡°Oh, I've learned so much, I learned this and I learned that and that was such a learning experience.¡± And I, all these years that I've been grown up, I haven't felt any learning, and I feel, ¡°Well, what did you learn and how did you know that you learned it?¡± And it was a mystery to me. (C: M-hm.) And just the last few weeks, or actually I've been realizing in the last year mainly is that I¡¯ve learned some things (C: M-hm.) and I know I've learned them and I, I know that, okay, that I'm at this point and with a certain situation or idea and that six months ago or three months ago it was different. (C: Uh-huh.) And so I'm feeling my learning and that's really exciting.
C Commentary 3: [A relationship should be one in which good feelings have just as much place as bad feelings, and here she's bringing out some very positive feelings about
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 39

herself, which is a healthy and valid part of a counseling relationship. It's always exciting to me to, uh, hear a client telling of positive steps which, uh, he or she has been taking, and here Sylvia sounds confident as she's doing something that she has decided to do in her own way, not necessarily following all the books, but doing what she feels and experiences is right.]
C1: And it¡¯s the awareness of it that's new. (S: Uh-huh. Yeah.) That you're beginning to realize, ¡°Hey, I am different in this respect, (S: Uh-huh.) I've learned something.¡±
S2: I've changed. (C: Uh-huh.) And I can see the difference and feel the difference. (C: Uh-huh.) Yeah.
C2: What are some of those differences?
S3: Well, (small laugh) um, I, I've made a decision to be more strict with my children (C: M-hm, m-hm.) and to, uh, to listen to them but decide that I'm their mother and I know many things they don't, and that I will make many more decisions than (C: M-hm.) I've made in the past. And uh-
C3: M-hm, m-hm. Sounds as though you feel a bit stronger that way.
S4: Yes. And and I've been trying it. (C: Uh, m-hm.) Trying being the more strict person and it's working beautifully. (C: Uh-huh.) Uh, they at first they, you know, have their little resistance or whatever it is but then we go on with the program, which is my program more, (C: M-hm.) and I feel a lot better about that as being uh uh helping children to adjust to the world.
C4: I mean, sounds, sounds like you feel more like a grown-up mother.
S5: M-hm. Capable. (C: M-hm.) Of making appropriate decisions. (C: M-hm.) For them. And another area is sex. And, uh, and I, I've done a lot of things in the past year, in the past mainly year that I haven't done before. That is, I've had intercourse with a few different men (C: M-hm.) and put myself in situations where before I was absolutely unwilling to do because of my fears and, and I've learned some things about myself. Like I know a lot more right now today about what kind of sexual relationship, what kind of intimate relationships that I want to have with men and that feels good. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) Beca ... and, um, and it only came through, uh, risking I mean there was no, it only became through trying things out, there was no amount (C: Uh-huh, uh-huh.) There was no amount of, of therapy or reading or thinking or talking (C: M-hm.) that helped me to learn those things, (C: M-hm.) but it was feeling strong enough within myself that I can take chances.
C5: So risking has been the road to learning (S: Yeah.) in the sexual area.
S6: Uh-huh. (C: M-hm.) And it is with my children (C: M-hm.) and it is with relating
to people in many ways, not just sexually. (She smiles.) (C: M-hm.) Other ways too. Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 40

(C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 4: [Sylvia is showing a lot of risking behavior. She's risking a good deal to talk about things like this on film. But what's more important is that she has come to the point in her own life where, where she realizes that her own experience is the best guide for her, not books, not therapy, not anything outside of herself. It is her own experience from which she can learn, and here she is learning in a very sensitive and, uh, personal area and is willing to share that with us.]
S6 (continued): Reaching out to people and approaching strangers and, uh ...
C6: Taking all kinds of risks that you hadn't before.
S7: Some. More, (C: M-hm.) which, I mean I, I don't know about all kinds. (C: Yeah.) Quite a few, and it's been exciting (C: M-hm.) and hard.
C7: And I guess that leads to a, uh, to a deeper kind of learning, or at any rate, a learning that you feel more sure of. I guess, I get a sense of assurance in what you're talking about. An assurance in you.
C Commentary 5: [One thing that has been true with Sylvia in every interview we've had is that she thinks carefully about what she says, she thinks carefully about what I say, and when what I say is not correct, doesn't match her experience, she's quite willing to correct me. She is very precise in both describing her own feelings and also in making sure that my response to them is also accurate.]
S8: Well, yes. Yes and no. (C: Uh-huh.) And I ... I ... feel more im... like I, I was saying before, I feel more immature and more and I'm more aware of my immaturity. (C: M-hm.) They're both, uh, a part of each other. (C: M-hm.) And uh, does that make, does that, I guess I'm thinking that it just sounds crazy.
C8: No, I don't
S9: To say that I feel more mature because I know I'm how, I know more about how immature I am.
C9: Uh-huh. No, that makes a lot of sense to me.
S Commentary 1: [I was surprised at what I said made sense to him. I think that I thought that it made sense to me, but that doesn't necessarily mean it would make sense to other people. I mean, it made in my own system of what was said. It felt good that he could understand me and he knew I that, that it made sense to him too.]
C Commentary 6: [It's important to Sylvia to make sure that she's accurately understood. Can anyone understand how she can be more mature by being aware of her immaturity? Well, to me, that's quite understandable, but it's clear that she wants to make certain that
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 41

my understanding extends to that degree.]
S10: It does.
C10: Uh-huh. Because you¡¯re, you're uh more aware of all aspects of yourself (S: M- hm.) and it sounds a more acceptant of them too. ¡°Yes, I'm mature in certain ways (S: M-hm.) and here's some ways I know I'm immature.¡±
S11: And I didn't know that before, (C: Uh-huh.) or I, I knew I felt uncomfortable that I didn't understand it. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) But that's related to something I've been thinking about, I think, about being here with you and, uh, and telling myself two things. (C: M-hm.) One is, ¡°Oh, you're just a, I'm just a dependent personality,¡± you know, Carl Rogers or blah-blah-blah-blah, don't, I don't run my own life. (C: M-hm.) I go for help a lot. (C: M-hm.) And then I tell myself I¡¯ve always been so strong and so together and having everything so worked out in my head that I don't allow myself to, to be helpless in a situation where it might be (C: M-hm.) good for me. (C: M-hm.) Like right now here with you, I would like to be more helpless, which to me means open, I think. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) To what to us and, uh, and I see myself being, uh, together and not being helpless. (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 2: [I think at that point I was feeling concern that I was just gonna go to another session of being all in control of things and and rattling on and on. I probably made a conscious decision that that I have to do something to, to break that and, uh, which was talk about it, talk about my fear. My fear was or concern that I wouldn't learn anything.]
C11: Sounds as though you, you voice that as a conflict, but it sounds as though really you're more on the, on the side of the second aspect that, uh, uh, to be open and, and in that sense helpless and vulnerable, I guess might be a possible term too, um, is something you, you really believe that's what you are, rather than that you're a totally dependent person and really helpless and have to, have to run for help. I sort of get the feeling you like this aspect of you that is able to be with me in a way that is, uh, more open, more vulnerable perhaps.
S12: Well, I like it and I also scold myself for being dependent, (C: M-hm.) so there's
C12: There are the two sides, uh-huh.
S13: there's something missing in the middle to connect, (C: M-hm.) and I it seems like you might have been talking about that and I still didn't hear it.
C13: (Nods.) M-hm. (S: Mm.) So really to get it more accurately, you scold yourself for for being dependent, for, for wanting (S: M-hm.) to be here, for example, with me, (S: M-hm.) and yet at the same time you, you feel. uh, well, that's good, I, I really like that, but where's the, where's the integration of those two, uh, points of view. (S: M-hm.) (Sylvia nods.)
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 42

S Commentary 3: [That seemed to me like a very excellent, um, not paraphrase, but when he, you know, tells me back (C: M-hm.) what he thinks I meant, it, um, solidified what I expressed in the previous comment about that there was something missing. It made more sense to me.]
S14: That's right. (small laugh) (pause of 7 seconds) May I hold your hands again? C14: Sure. M-hm. (They lean closer and clasp hands and remain holding hands.) S15: To feel that old feeling.
C15: Okay.
S Commentary 4: [When we did that filming in A_____, we held each others' hands the whole time, and I imagine that it occurred me that it might be good to do that again. I feel good. At that time, I, I wanted to get away from being in my head so completely the whole time, experiencing.]
C Commentary 7: [I felt very comfortable during this holding of hands. Uh, I'm reminded of a friend of mine who said that he did eye therapy and, uh, in a sense that's what this was. Our eyes were very much in contact, and, uh, I think as much was going on at a non-verbal way as in a verbal way. It was a close relationship, and we both experienced it that way.]
S16: (Clears throat.) (pause of 11 seconds) I would like to be less, uh, less strong right now. I would like to give myself the gift of not having to be sensible (C: M-hm.) and reasonable and (C: M-hm, m-hm.) Also the protection, (C: M-hm.) protect, (C: M-hm.) protect myself.
C16: M-hm, m-hm, m-hm. Really would be giving yourself a gift if you could just kind of let go (S: M-hm.) and not, uh, not be so (S: M-hm.) competent (S: M-hm.) and able. (S: Mm.) (She nods.) (pause of 5 seconds)
C Commentary 8: [It seems clear that the reason she wants to hold my hands is that she wants to experience something that is very frightening to her, namely to drop her competent, reasonable, strong self and let herself be some of the weakness and vulnerability that she is.]
S17: And I think it helps to touch ( C: M-hm.) (Carl nods.) you, to, to, to let go of the shoulds, of my (small laugh)
C17: M-hm, m-hm. And you feel some contact and maybe you can say, ¡°Well, maybe I don't have to be so strong, so (S: M-hm, mm.) Maybe I can just let go more.¡±
S18: (pause of 5 seconds) Yes. (small laugh) (She sighs.) ( pause of 22 seconds) I Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 43

want to get away from all, um, my rationalizing right now this minute, and I don't know how to do that (C: M-hm.) except to shut up. (Carl nods.) (C: M-hm, m- hm.) And, (pause of 5 seconds) so it's not like I have so much a desire to sit and not talk and look in your eyes as I have a desire to not be the way I am all the time. (C: M-hm.) And I don't know yet (C: M-hm, m-hm.) what else to do. (C: M- hm.)
C Commentary 9: [In the interviews that we held a year ago, the silences were very long and Sylvia found a, a great deal of security and, uh, seemed to profit a great deal from holding my hands during the interview, and here she, uh, returns to the pattern of a year ago. It's another indication of the fact that these interviews with her perhaps rest more solidly on just the fact of the relationship than they do even on the content of what, uh, she's saying and talking about.]
C18: Have to be kind of silent, to let go of that rational and rationalizing part of you.
S19: M-hm. (pause of 25 seconds) It feels easier to focus on, uh, in this position that I'm in now with you I feel more focused, (C: M-hm.) (He nods.) yeah.
C19: Are there any things that sort of come bubbling up?
S20: Yeah, I know it's something I want to talk about. (She smiles.)
C20: Okay. M-hm. (pause of 10 seconds) (She smiles.) But it's not easy, huh.
S21: No, it's not easy and I'm enjoying the richness of feeling (C: M-hm.) your hands this way and letting go of some more of, of the camera business (C: M-hm.) and the ... (C: M-hm, m-hm.) And, uh, and the fear about bringing up something that (laughs) (clears throat) and knowing that in about fifteen minutes it'll all seem, um, (sighs, smiling) I don't know not quite as serious. (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 5: [It just had to take its own time for me to get to where I could feel like I could say the words that I needed to say. It was almost like waiting and just like, uh, you know, what else is new while I'm waiting? For something that took a natural process that it had to take.]
C Commentary 10: [If anyone has a doubt about the value of silences, it should be removed by this interchange. Sylvia's saying, ¡°I'm doing more work when I'm silent than I am when I'm talking.¡±]
S Commentary 6: [His specific comments or the content of his comments is not necessarily helpful as opposed to not helpful, but what it does do that is valuable is that it gives me something to bounce against. It's a stimulation to better focus myself.]
S21 (continued): There's something I've been wanting to talk over with you.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 44

C21: Okay.
S22: Good. I'm real attracted to black people. (C: M-hm.) And, uh, that's about the craziest part of me, um, I'm ashamed (C: Mm.) Um, I'm embarrassed, not right now this minute, but when I'm out walking around. (Carl is nodding.) (C: When it happens, m-hm.) And living my life.
C22: You feel what an awful thing it is that I'm attracted to black people. (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 11: [I think that from the time that she first wanted to hold my hands, I felt that she probably was going to make use of that closer relationship to get to something that she hadn't been able to express before, and now she's taking really a great risk in talking about something very private, very personal.]
S23: Not, and not all the black people I see (C: M-hm.) but a lot. (C: M-hm.) And, uh, like the black people that I talked it over with, it seems, it doesn't seem like any problem at all, they understand perfectly. (C: M-hm.) And, but my family, I think it's a real painful situation for them when I have as many black friends as I do. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) And-
C23: That sounds like not only your family looks down on it or something but that you scold yourself for it too.
S24: Uh-huh, right. I, I think there's something wrong with me.
C24: Yeah, that's it.
S25: Um. But it doesn't-
C25: ¡°What kind of a crazy person am I that I feel attracted (S: Well, sick...) to so many blacks?¡±
S26: Sick, sick I think of it as
C26: Sick, that's
S27: and ne... neurotic, um. (C: Hm.) Strange. (C: Mm.) (She closes her eyes and clears her throat.) (pause of 7 seconds)
C27: You really feel that there's something sick in you that causes you to have so many black friends.
S28: (Opening her eyes) Well, I keep looking for a reasonable explanation (C: M-hm.) and there is none. (She laughs a little)
C28: So there isn't any reason except that you feel that way.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 45

S29: M-hm. And I ...
C29: And that isn't good enough.
S30: Well, I, I, I've been struggling so long to accept that in myself and I'm still fighting. It's like I'm fighting to accept that in myself and, and letting go rather than thinking it's a terrible thing (C: M-hm.) and and that I can't let other people know. (C: Hm, m-hm, m-hm.) And, uh,
C30: You feel ¡°I should not feel that way. I shouldn't be that way. Sick.¡±
C Commentary 12: [I think by that response I was trying to exaggerate her feelings in order to assist her in, uh, becoming more accepting of them, but as I, uh, listen
to it I think I might have responded more powerfully by responding to
her struggle to accept herself as a person who is attracted to blacks.]
S31: Like when I, wh ... , I imagine when I meet a black person that I am attracted
to, that that person will know (He nods.) (C: M-hm, mm-hm.) and I always wonder if
they can tell.
C31: Mm, see if it shows. (S: Uh-huh.) M-hm, m-hm.
S32: And that they'll think I'm strange. (C: M-hm.) M-hm. And it has something to do with all the black/white sex stuff that goes on, like, um, black women and white men which is very foreign to me, I have very little thinking or, um, concern about that. But the black men/white women thing, (C: M-hm.) um. and I'm attracted to a lot of black men. (C: M-hm.) Yeah.
C32: It has something to do with the sexual attraction.
S33: I know, yeah, it does, I know it does. (C: M-hm.) But it's not just that, it's also (C: M-hm.) children and and women and lifestyle (C: M-hm.) and as I see it through my tunnel vision, which I do. (C: Uh-huh.) (clears her throat)
C33: So I guess you're saying, um, yeah, there's a sexual element in it but I'm also attracted to their way of living.
S34: M-hm. That I see. (C: Yeah.) And I, but I think what I see isn't what is.
C34: (He nods.) That's partly your fantasy or something. (Sylvia nods.) (pause of 8 seconds)
S35: Maybe putting that, that, this on this film will help me that (She smiles.) stand on the ground and be who I am. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) And not be so ashamed, so embarrassed and so, (C: M-hm.) um, uncomfortable.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 46

C35: In a way you're saying it out loud and really in a wa ..., in a sense, publicly, may help you to feel ¡°I don't need to be so ashamed of that.¡± (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 13: [I've filmed a number of interviews, but I never had a client knowingly make use of the filming to try to gain more acceptance of self and clearly that's what Sylvia is doing in this interchange. By putting herself clearly on record, she feels perhaps then she will feel less ashamed, less sick, more, uh, truly acceptant of the person that she is and the experiences that she has.]
S36: And I tell myself I should be joyful, I mean, (C: M-hm.) (She laughs a little.) why, why negative? (C: M-hm.) And I, I guess, you know, the culture or I don't know, I (sighs) (pause of 6 seconds)
C36: But you feel disapproved of probably, certainly by your family and maybe by the culture in this respect.
S37: My friends don't understand. (C: M-hm.) My white friends.
C37: M-hm, m-hm. (He nods.) (pause of 10 seconds) Makes you feel different. (S: Hm, hm.) Set apart or something like that. (pause of 6 seconds)
S38: Well, sometimes I feel different but I know a lot of other people, I believe a lot of other people feel the same way. (C: M-hm.) and I know a lot of other white women are attracted to black men. So I believe that's common.
C38: So that somehow you know you're not alone in this.
C Commentary 14: [Here's another example of the fact that expressing all the negative attitudes she has toward her own attraction to blacks leads her to realize this really is not so bad after all; there are positive sides of it. Other people, other women feel the same way.]
S39: But it seems like the strength of my feelings and, uh, the on-goingness and my de ..., my desire to identify with the black culture and, (C: M-hm, m-hm) um, is. is what seems out of proportion to me. That I feel out of proportion about it. (They both nod.)
C39: M-hm. So Okay, other women feel the same way but not to the degree that you do, you think. (S: M-hm.) That's kind of out of (S: M-hm.) Out of scale.
S40: Or in general to the degree too, not just man/woman, but (C: M-hm.) people. (pause of 15 seconds) Maybe I, (small laugh) it'll come a time accepting that part of myself.
C40: Maybe someday you won't be ashamed of yourself for that.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 47

S41: M-hm. Maybe someday I can be proud of myself. (C: M-hm.) And for what I believe and feel. (C: M-hm.) And I'm gradually learning to do that.
C41: Uh-huh, m-hm. So, perhaps what you are and what you feel will be something you can take real satisfaction in instead of feeling (S: M-hm.) how shameful.
S42: M-hm. And to me it's it's a sign of my growth is being able to do what I'm doing with you now, you'll make a film. (C: M-hm.) (She laughs.) (C: M-hm, m-hm, m- hm, m-hm, m-hm.) It's a real brazen thing to do. (C: Yeah.) M-hm.
C42: Feel this is a risk. (S: M-hm.) And that's a sign of learning and of growth.
S43: M-hm. Well, also it somehow it's a little different from a risk in the sense of some of my friends say, ¡°A film? Wh... What do you want to do that for?¡± I mean, there's suspiciousness about it and ...
C43: M-hm, m-hm. (He nods.) So that's seen as another strange part of you. S44: Well, not so much, I mean, that's not a
C44: Not so.
S45: It doesn't bother me. (clears throat) (pause of 11 seconds) Sometimes I, well, right now (She laughs and he nods.) sometimes, I have the sense of talking away what we were talking about and I'm wondering, if I went away, if I withdraw from the subject, uh, what's your perspective? It seems like we were talking about my attraction to black people and now we're not. And I'm, I don't know, like did we finish talking about it or did I withdraw?
S Commentary 7: [My sense is that I was feeling confused about what was going on.]
C Commentary 15:[I think this is a sample of Sylvia's sharp awareness of her own experiencing. I don't believe that in content we had left the subject of her attraction to blacks. But she realizes in herself that somehow she has withdrawn from that. She's, as she says, talked away from it. Obviously, that's because it has been a, a frightening subject to her. Perhaps also because she feels she's gone as far as she can go with it at the present time.]
S45 (continued): Um
C45: It's more of your analyzing it, isn't it, trying to think (She nods.) about what's happening. ¡°Did I run away from it? Or was I finished with it?¡± (S: M-hm.) Or continue think about it
S46: analyze it (small laugh)
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 48

C46: Instead of asking, ¡°Do I feel as though I'm finished with it? (S: M-hm.) Do I feel as though I'm escaping from it?¡±
S47: I like that. I like your your questions, or comments. (C: M-hm.) Do I feel finished? (pause of 10 seconds) No, I don't, I don't feel, I don't know (He nods.) about escaping (C: M-hm.) and feeling finished, it's
C47: The feeling is one of uncertainty.
S48: M-hm. (She nods.) (pause of 35 seconds) Well I I feel like I want to go back and listen to what we just talked about, (C: M-hm.) that I didn't hear it very well. (C: M-hm, m-hm, m-hm, m-hm, m-hm.) And ...
C Commentary 16: [This is one of the commonest experiences when a person delves into areas that are sensitive, where they've exposed themselves in, in ways that make them very vulnerable. Sylvia, like many other clients, hardly knows what she has said because it has come so close to her inner feelings, because it¡¯s such a delicate experience. Incidentally, this is one point where a wrong response on the part of the counselor can be very frightening and very threatening because her inner self is really very exposed at this point. This inability to remember is the, uh, defense of the self against being changed too rapidly. It probably would be very good for her to hear this later and to begin to accept more fully what she's just been expressing.]
C48: ¡°What did I say? What did I feel?¡± You'd like to have a rerun of it and it
S49: M-hm. Like I just went jabber-jabber-jabber-jabber. (C: M-hm.) And all that. (C: M-hm.) And so-
C49: Sounds like you scold yourself for that, as though, ¡°Oh, I just talk talk-talk.¡± (She nods.) (S: M-hm.) It didn't sound like just talk-talk-talk to me.
S50: It didn't?
C50: No.
C Commentary 17: [Throughout these interviews, my own feelings have been largely empathic and caring ones. Here's the first time that I express some other feeling of my own. I simply couldn't permit her to scold herself for what she's been doing, and so I said, ¡°It doesn't sound like, uh, just talk-talk-talk to me,¡± which was a very real feeling on my part at that moment.]
S Commentary 8: [At that time I had the feeling that Carl was really asking me something that he wanted to know. Like genuinely interested and concerned about that.]
S51: (pause of 6 seconds) Well, I would like to hear it again, (He nods.) and it has, it, Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 49

and slowed down somehow, (C: M-hm.) and I now (small laugh) I could think like taking your hand and looking at you and slowing down. (C: M-hm, m-hm.) And then when I'm slowing--and that's what I want to do ... (C: M-hm.) But while I'm doing it, I'm scolding myself. ¡°What are you doing this for?¡±
C51: M-hm. (pause of 5 seconds) Let me give you a very brief rerun of part of it. You were saying, ¡°I'm ashamed of myself for being attracted to black men. Uh, I know many other women have some of the same feeling, but it seems to me I have that feeling disproportionately strong and uh my family is critical of that, the culture is critical. Um, I'd like to be able to accept those feelings in myself. Maybe I'm making a little bit of progress along that line, but still it does seem a need to be a a strange part of me that I don't understand.¡± (She nods.) (pause of 10 seconds)
S52: That's right.
C52: ¡°And part of that attraction is sexual but I'm also attracted to their children, to the way they live, to a lot of things about them.¡± (S: M-hm.)
C Commentary 18: [Sometimes when I show what an accurate listener I am, I feel proud of myself and I do in this moment.]
S53: And what I, what you said that strikes me the most is it¡¯s the part of me I don't understand, (C: M-hm.) it's a part of me I don't understand.
C53: It just is, but you can't quite uh can't quite get at the reasons for it. You have to have the reasons.
S54: (Laughs a little) (pause of 5 seconds) And I don't know why I have to have the reasons, (C: m-hm.) I don't have to explain to anybody. (C: M-hm.) So it seems like I don't have to have a reason. (She smiles.)
C54: M-hm. (pause of 20 seconds) So maybe the intellectual understanding isn't as important as you thought it was.
S55: I think the acceptance is what's most important, (C: M-hm, m-hm.) my acceptance. (C: M-hm.)
C Commentary 19: [As she has shown throughout the, uh, interview, as she says, she analyzes and analyzes. She has to see the reasons for all of her behavior, and
now she's taking a little bit lighter look at that, and realizing, "I don't have to have a reason for every bit of my behavior, I don't have to understand all of it. I can simply accept it. Perhaps I can simply accept it." I admire Sylvia's courage in being willing to voice the very, uh, intimate feelings she has on film. I believe that both the expression of those feelings will be constructive for her and that the willingness to share them with a wider audience will also have a positive effect in her life.]
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 50

C55: ¡°If I could accept it, I wouldn't have to understand in the sense of knowing the reasons.¡±
S56: (Nods.) Or explain to anybody. (He nods.) (C: M-hm, m-hm, m-hm.) M-hm.
C56: Sounds like that's what you're doing in imagination a lot, trying to explain it to somebody.
S57: M-hm. (pause of 25 seconds) It seems like I'll probably never understand it. (Both nod.) So I can make life a lot easier for myself by not trying. (They both nod.)
C57: M-hm. (pause of 5 seconds) It may be one of those things that if you can accept it, you wouldn't need to have all the explanations. (pause of 9 seconds)
S58: Wonder what (She closes her eyes for a moment, sighs and clears her throat.) what keeps me, um, feeling like I need to justify myself. (C: M-hm.) Like that's a more basic
C58: M-hm. It's a broader statement of it.
S59: than about a particular view, accepting myself about this and about that.
C59: M-hm. You would in general feel ¡°I have to justify myself with proper reasons.¡± S60: M-hm. (pause of 20 seconds) (smiles) Well, do you do that? Do you
C60: I suspect we all do, some. (S: Yeah.) M-hm.
S61: So there's nobody that just (Both laugh.) floats along on their (Both laugh.) intuition. That¡¯s not it either. So what I need is more balance really. (C: M-hm.) Not that I¡¯m wrong to justify it, but that I can be more, justify it less and feel more, (Both nod.) (C: M-hm, m-hm.) and feel comfortable. (C: M-hm.)
S Commentary 9: [This experience that I had with Carl is, uh, real special to me and, uh, one of the things about it that feels real close to me is the emotional safety I felt with him. That there was somehow a, a boundary or a fence or a something that, uh, separated the space that I was in with Carl from the rest of the world and inside that space I was very safe and I would not be hurt. I didn't have to have any fear that I would be hurt no matter what I said or did, and the focus of my thinking was how very safe that felt. Another thing I felt from him that I think has affected me some over this time is that I felt, uh, like support from him to be myself, to listen to myself and to respond to myself and to care about, to put myself first. I think about how my life might have been changed by my experiences with Carl. I think Carl's caring for me in the way that he did, his, uh, modeling, helping me to learn to care for myself, where like maybe my most important resource would be myself. (C: Yeah.) So it seems to me that in his style of relating there's a lot of support to do that, a lot of encouragement and influence to listen to
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 51

myself.]
END OF SESSION
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Sylvia, 5th Interview, page 52

 This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Kathy Interview by Carl Rogers (Circa 1975)
[Source: Shostrom, E. L. (1975). Three approaches to psychotherapy II [Film]. Orange, CA.]
Rogers: I want to meet this client as a person. And I want our encounter to be that of two persons. I have no desire to have advance information regarding her. I'll work with whatever she wishes to reveal of herself. It's my hope that I can first of all be myself. Be present. Be real in the relationship. I usually find it easy, also, to feel a caring for the client. But I can't predict in advance whether I will feel that. I would like to let myself enter into her inner world of feelings and perceptions as accurately and as sensitively as I can. In order to experience that kind of empathy, I'11 need to lay aside, as far as possible, my own biases and preconceptions. The extent to which I can do that will to a considerable degree determine the progress which she is able to make in the time we have together. I feel I'm a responsible therapist. I'm responsible for doing my best to create a facilitative climate in which she can explore her feelings in the way that she desires, move toward the goals that she wishes to achieve. It's in this deep sense that my approach to therapy is centered in the client. Aiming to empower him or her to search out and experience the areas of conflict or pain, to perceive self in new ways, to choose to follow new options in behavior. It is my own self I find feelings other than those of caring and of understanding I'll feel free to express these; but as my own feelings, not as any judgment of or guide for the client. Or, especially on a first interview, I may have no other feelings than a prizing of the client and a desire to in-dwell in her experience. There's no way I can tell in advance. For me each encounter with a client is fresh, unpredictable, often enriching to my learning as well as hopefully, enriching the self-learning of the client. So I look forward with eagerness to whatever our time together may bring.
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy, Introduction, page 53

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 Carl Rogers¡¯ Interview with Kathy -- 1977
T: Hi, Kathy.
C: Hi, Dr. Rogers.
T: I'm really glad to meet you. C: Thank you.
T: And... I don't know whether you're feeling a little uptight under these lights and all, but I think I'm feeling a little uptight, but I don't think that will last very long. And I have, not having met you before I, I don't have any idea what sort of concerns or issues you want to bring up, but I'd be glad to hear whatever you want to say.
C1: I'm not quite sure where to begin.
T1: Uhm, hmm.
C2: But, uh, some of my concerns are, um, I've become very much aware since my husband was killed last December, um, my own feelings of aloneness.
T2: Uhm, hmm.
C3: And I don't think it¡¯s directly related to his death because we had been
separated for about four years before he was killed. And I, I became aware that, after he died especially, that he was really very important in my life. I was kind of using him as a shield against going out and having other relationships. And now he¡¯s gone and I can't use that anymore. And I feel very, very frightened of new male relationships.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 54

T3: So in some way his, his death, uh, really made you aware of the fear you have of, of new relationships, especially with men.
C4: Right, right. Definitely, I didn't have him. I didn't have that to hide behind anymore. And, uh, I had a tremendous feeling of loss when he died because I did care for him. But, um, in going out with other men lately, I just have this feeling of, uh, it's very strange. I'm very uncomfortable.
T4: So that, the feeling you have is something more than just the loss of him. It's a different feeling, a fee1ing of uneasy or scared or unsure.
C5: Yes. For a long time I didn't feel like going out and that was fine. I was going through my loss of him, but that was all right. I didn¡¯t push it or anything. But just recently I started going out and I've been aware for years of how lonely, I have been very, very lonely. I haven't been dating very much for the last four years, mostly just working and taking care of the kids. And um, I think I'm keeping myself in kind of a no-win situation where I'm really lonely. And yet it's kind of like I'm keeping myself there because I've got a guard around me, and I'd kind of like to break out of that.
T5: It¡¯s as though you're in some way sort of responsible for your loneliness.
C6: Yes, I know that. I'm very... I am.
T6: And that's something you'd like to break out of that shell, or that safeguard that you've been hiding behind.
C7: Part of me does.
T7: Part of you does. Ok, ok. C8: Part of me says, ¡°No way¡±.
T8: So it really is a very ambivalent, two-way thing. (C takes a breath) I suspect it's been pretty comfortable, um, behind that safeguard; it's more of risk if you break out. Is that part of it?
C9: I, I can almost, well I was going to say I can almost go back to the point where I really built up that safeguard in me when my marriage was going bad. Over five years ago and I could feel myself, and I know I did, I withdrew and I¡¯ve been withdrawn ever since. It's kind of like, ¡°No more. I don't want any more hurt.¡± So...
T9: Uhm, hmm, it's just too damn risky, taking the possibility of being hurt again. And you've withdrawn from that for a long time.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 55

C10: Uhm, hmm. See, and I've been aware of this for a long time too, but I never go beyond the awareness level.
T10: So that the knowledge isn't new, it's the um, question of what you do about it.
C11: That's right, that's right. How can one stay safe and still be open?
T11: The way you shake your head makes me feel, ¡°I don't see any way.¡±
C12: I don't, I really don¡¯t. If I did, maybe I probably would have done it a long time ago, but I don't.
T12: Just seems kind of unbearable to, to be, open with a person and yet feel safe.
C13: I, I think I'm a pretty open person to begin with. And uh, everything is fine in a relationship as long as the focus does not turn onto me.
T13: I see, I see. If you can keep the focus on the other person you're ok.
C14: That's right. And the focus on me up to a certain level, but not in the romantic kind of a way. A friendship, I would value that.
T14: But love, you want to, keep that at arms length.
C15: But you know, that's important though, because um, if a person doesn't want to really be your friend, how can you have them for a lover?
T15: Uhm, hmm.
C16: No way.
T16: Not quite sure I get that. You mean friendship is a necessary first step, is that what you're saying, or...
C17: It is for me.
T17: Yeah. (Long pause)
C18: We've gotten to the point where I won't go beyond.
T18: Uhm, hmm, that's what I was sort of thinking. You've thought your way this far, but then where do you...
C19: I've laid the cards out and that's all I want to play.
T19: So that, in this relationship it's like in your other relationships.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 56

C20: That's right.
T20: It goes so far and then, ¡°Let's stop. That's as far as I want to go.¡± (Pause) (C: Hmm.) If you go any further, there's a risk, isn't it?
C21: Yes, it is.
T21: And I think your eyes tell me you're feeling that risk right now. (Pause)
C22: So here I am. (Pause) I feel like saying to myself, ¡°Well you got this far. It's not so bad.¡± (Laughter) It's all right; I make the best out of it.
T22: It's all right up to this point.
C23: Yeah, right.
T23: So let¡¯s laugh it off.
C24: Yeah, make a joke. Talk about something else. T24: Could, very easy to run away from yourself.
C25: See, but that's it. I made a bargain with myself. There's two parts: the part that understands and it¡¯s all right, and the other part that's scared silly. But the part that understands isn¡¯t going to force the part that's scared. When it¡¯s safe enough, I'll be kind to myself.
T25: And let the scared part come out when, when you¡¯re ready for it, when...
C26: When the scared part feels ready. It¡¯s as if part of me is in a cave away from the rest of the world. But it cert-, I certainly can't come out of that cave, unless I know that it¡¯s all right, that there won't be a lot of pain to greet me. What's the sense in coming out? So it¡¯s up to the best of me to make sure that there are nurturing people around me.
T26: And when you feel safe enough, either in this relationship or with other people, then you can let yourself come out of the cave and let the scared part of you emerge.
C27: That's right. That's why, that's why I value the friendships with men and with other people. I don't care for the rest. Not to say that I don't need it, I do, but I need the friendship, and the safety and the security of that first. I, um, took a trip not too long ago and I met a man that I had known years and years ago, only very briefly. And I met him again I went out with him. And he was such a lovely person, such a kind person, and a very ... a very good person.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 57

Anyway, it was in the mountains and as I was driving home from his, um, his home, looking at the mountains, I, I had this feeling. It¡¯s kind of funny, I haven't read the Carlos Castaneda books, but I know the concept of the third eye. And I was feeling as I was driving through those mountains that, ¡°Now it¡¯s all right for my third eye to come out, and to be able to perceive.¡± And I felt so good. But when I came back home, I've kind of busied myself with woodworking, and the house, and that kind of thing. And I'm kind of back in the same environment, in the same predicament. But I know that I, I consciously at times choose between focusing in on things and not.
T27: I'm, I'm really interested in that experience, when you were away from him, then there was just a little while, when it felt safe. And you could perceive...
C28: When I was driving.
T28: Yeah, when you were driving and you could perceive yourself and the whole situation, I guess.
C29: I could perceive, it doesn¡¯t have much to, it did have to do with him, but I could perceive myself, and my closed-offedness. And at that time I was open, and I had that perception of myself and that awareness that I had been closed. And that, when I was driving through that canyon I was feeling very open and now I could have my understanding, and it was a1l right.
T29: You let yourself for that time come out of the cave.
C30: Yeah, yes, it was great. And then he came to see me. He flew in to see me a couple of weeks ago. And um, I felt, see I was aware I had this memory of that opening up and so I felt more guarded.
T30: Ah, is that right.
C31: But kind of slowly unpeeling layers, or slowing coming up.
T31: But somehow, having, having come out of the cave, you were afraid you might come out of the cave too easily.
C32: Too, yeah that's right, that's right.
T32: ¡°So, watch out, be careful¡±.
C33: That's right.
T33: You sound like a very tender, vulnerable part of you that lives in that cave. C34: I think my most tender part. (C cries)
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 58

T34: Your most?
C35: My most tender part.
T35: Your most tender part. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm. It's really a very precious part of you that you keep in the cave
C36: (C takes long breath) I, for a long, long time, I¡¯ve had the feeling of hopelessness of ever coming out. And do you know life is an existence without all of you...
T36: Without?
C37: ...all of you.
T37: Yeah, I see.
C38: Right.
T38: So, you, the hopelessness, I gather is because you know you're not living with all of you. Part of you you're keeping well hidden.
C39: That's right.
T39: Well guarded. And it isn't really living, unless you can live it with all of you.
C40: That's right, it's just doing things, just doing things. The part that, you know, that I consciously avoid are the arts. The things that I love, music, theater, paintings, that kind of thing.
T40: Those are the things that touch your feelings.
C41: I don¡¯t get to the core.
T41: Ok, things that touch your feelings or touch the core of you, those you want to stay away from.
C42: That's right.
T42: They got, they get too close, too close to this very tender part of you.
C43: (Pause) I¡¯ve reached another stop.
T43: Uhm, hmm, but you felt safe enough to let out a little bit more and now it¡¯s come to another stop.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 59

C44: (Pause) I have to give equal time to all of my dimensions. We just have, I just felt, you know, in touch with my vulnerability, but now I¡¯m feeling angry.
T44: Ok.
C45: Like, ¡°It¡¯s none of your business...¡±
T45: Uhm, hmm.
C46: ...what I'm feeling.
T46: Uhm, hmm, what am I doing getting that close to the vulnerable part of you? ¡°Damn it, stay away.¡±
C47: That¡¯s right, that¡¯s right. What do you want to do that for? T47: Uhm, hmm. Uhm, hmm.
C48: You've got other things to do. (C laughs)
T48: So you¡¯re putting up all kinds of guards against me, and striking out, ¡°What the hell are you doing¡±, and, ¡°getting so close to the vulnerable part of me, why don¡¯t you go do something else¡±, hmm?
C49: That's the part that keeps me lonely.
T49: Uhm, hmm. So that, that pushing away part, that kind of angry, ¡°Get away from me¡± part, is what keeps you very lonely.
C50: It's like I don't really trust that I can trust you to know that. I can tell this and that. You may feel a little something about it, but what then? You know, I mean you know, ¡°It's a nice story, so, big deal, something else to do¡±.
T50: What I hear is that, is that you feel that I don¡¯t really care, just a story... C51: That's right.
T51: Just something... but what if I do ...
C52: You know...
T52: But what if I do care.
C53: (C takes a breath) I want to make a joke and say, "Aw, go on." (C laughs)
You know, um, I'm a nurse and, a psychiatric nurse, worked in a psychiatric hospital last year. One of the big things there, the patients got a lot of points if they would talk in group. I mean everybody wants you to talk. You know,
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 60

the good patient talks. And I thought, you know, anybody can talk. The reason why people don¡¯t talk is not because they can¡¯t talk, it¡¯s because they don't know how people are going to respond. That's where it¡¯s at. So I don¡¯t think the patients were not being good patients. I don't think they were being bad patients because they weren't talking. I think that the staff should have a demerit for not responding. Ok, these patients talked, now how do you respond? Makes it a whole new ballgame.
T53: Yeah.
C54: And so now, I talked. (C laughs) T54: You've earned some points.
C55: Yeah now I earned my points, that's true. But, um, I think that¡¯s the fear of everyone. It¡¯s not so much revealing themselves, but being cared about. That's my fear. That's my fears after I've revealed myself, ¡°Who cares?¡±
T55: It's uh, when you've let out a tender part of yourself, then it¡¯s damned important to know, ¡°Does this other person care? Does it make any difference?¡±
C56: My husband used to say he cared, but it was just words, it was words. He um, I think he cared as much as he could care but, he had so many conflicts inside of himself that he didn't even see me as a person. Didn't even see me. It's not that he didn't want to care. It's that he couldn't, he was too busy with himself. But I understand that. And I understand that with other people, too. But see I just can¡¯t go around revealing myself all the time to people who are just too busy with themselves.
T56: Uhm, hmm. You need a response, you need a caring, you need to make a difference to somebody.
C57: That's it, not to someone who¡¯ll say, "Oh, well, Kathy, I really care," and then I don't see them for a couple of years. Or, "I'll call you" and then they never call. You know, when I first split up from my husband, I would go to these different functions, not with a date, but with friends, and meet a man and he'd say, "I'll call you". And for a while there I'd be sure that I wasn't home, because I couldn't stand to know if he didn't call. And that way I didn't know if he didn't call, so there was a possibility that he had called. But I wasn't home, so how could I know. So with that, that, that vulnerable I was really in touch with it.
T57: It makes so much difference to you to know whether the other person is going to really respond. ¡°When they say they care, do they care?¡±
C58: That's right, caring people, will call you, or drop by, ¡°How's it going?¡±, that Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 61

kind of thing.
T58: And that's not enough?
C59: No, it would be enough, if they would do that. (C laughs) That'd be just great, that would be just great. I don't think I really want that much from another person. The morsels are fine, but I'm not even getting the morsels.
T59: Uhm, hmm, it isn't as though you want a whole meal, it's that...
C60: Yeah, I mean I could work up to it all right. That's why I think with this friend it was nice. And may have gone back in but I felt myself, come alive a little bit. A little bit of magic had come into my life, and that was nice. And I'd rather not come out all at once and run back in. I'd rather come out bit-by- bit and stay out. But see the thing of it is that, and like we're talking now, a little bit, or I'm thinking about the focus of the relationship, it has to be this male-female kind of thing. And, um, I don't think that what I need to do is to come out and have love, and then, think about a male-female relationship. But I don't know how I can come out too much without a man (C laughs).
T60: That's kind of a, contradiction, in a way. A dilemma, it's a dilemma. (T laughs) But you feel what you want first is a relationship with a person, only it helps if it¡¯s a man.
C61: That's right. It must be a man. Or...
T61: It isn't just better if it's a man, it's a necessity.
C62: It must be a man, that¡¯s right, because that's where my fear is.
T62: So that's where you fear is, a fear of a relationship with a man. And yet, you'd like to be able to really come out of the cave first, before it became a man- woman, sexual relationship, or anything like that. Is that what you're saying?
C63: I'd like to have a caring relationship. And its kind of funny, it's like a little girl wanting a man to take her out of the cave, and, care about. I'll put it back on me, I feel like a little girl. Someone to care about me and to know that I'm comfortable and that I'm all right, and then ask for himself.
T63: And then ask?
C64: For himself, of the relationship.
T64: But first, you'd like to have a man come at least to the entrance of the cave and take the hand of you as a little girl and lead you gently out, caring for you. Then maybe, other kinds of things might happen.
C65: (Pause) The little girl is the non-sexual, being. That's right, ¡°Don't use me Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 62

sexually first. And then if you like it good enough, keep coming back.¡± That's what I don't want.
T65: The little girl, the little girl will grow up if you care enough, for her. C66: That's right, and can respond as a woman, if the other is there.
T66: Can you tell him that? Could you tell him that?
C67: I'm confused, do I tell one man that, or is that what I...
T67: I was thinking of this, this one man. C68: Oh, this individual.
T68: Uhm, hmm.
C69: Oh, I think I could tell him that, I know I could. But you know, I start putting him down. (T laughs) I know that's just, my sister told me, she said, ¡°That's just because you're scared.¡± Because I told her the kind of man I would, I thought I would be comfortable with, and he is this kind of person. And then I start telling her all these bad things. And she said, "Nobody would be perfect. You would do this with anyone, some." But with this person I think I could.
T69: Maybe you could let him know what you need.
C70: I'd like to be able to carry that over. I suppose maybe, maybe I'm glossing that over or something, but I'd like to carry it over in my relationships with everyone. To get what I need from the relationship, and not focusing in on the other person. See, I think the way I am I'm the perfect nurse, the perf-, you know, anything for somebody else. And that's fine, focus in on them any time. But on myself, like I'm too scared to do that. Like that's a no-no. But I'd like to be able to do that, focus in on my own needs, first. But I feel kind of selfish when I look at it that way. I fee1 like a taker instead of a giver and that's got a negative, connotation.
T70: You're so much a nurse that when you even think of saying, ¡°But I need this for myself.¡± that seems kind of wrong, selfish.
C71: ¡°Wait a minute, you're the nurse. What is this?¡± T71: ¡°You're supposed to be caring for the other person.¡± C72: That's right.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 63

T72: But once in a while you realize, ¡°I'd like to care for myself, first.¡±([Pause) C73: Seems awful. (C laughs)
T73: Just to say that.
C74: ¡°You're so naughty, just thinking about it.¡± (C laughs)
T74: Just to say that, seems, ¡°What a selfish person I am.¡±
C75: Yeah.
T75: ¡°Terrible, awful.¡±
C76: I feel wicked, but I enjoy it. I'm enjoying thinking about it.
T76: It's fun just to imagine, ¡°I might want something for myself, first.¡±
C77: It's really a lovely fantasy to be completely narcissist, completely self- centered, and into pleasure, and into comfort. (C sighs)
T77: Just being good to yourself.
C78: But in a way, you know, in a way I am being good to myself by keep that vulnerable part of me away until it's safe. Because not everybody would be good to you, not everybody would be kind. There are people who would use you up, and not bat an eyelash, and not even think about it.
T78: So you have a real respect for your, for your instinct for preserving yourself. C79: That's right.
T79: You can't trust everyone, not everyone would care. (Pause)
C80: I was just smiling, I was thinking, but I care.
T80: And you say that with a smile, but that's pretty deep too isn't it?
C81: Uhm, hmm. I do care.
T81: ¡°I care for myself¡±.
C82: I like caring. I like it. I like caring for myself, and not giving away every part of my, just because some Tom, Dick, or Harry wants it.
T82: ¡°I really prize myself, and I'm proud of that. I'm not going to just give myself Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 64

away.¡±
C83: That's right. It's nice to have that feeling of caring for myself, that's good.
But you know since Dick died, I was thinking, I could die tomorrow. Any of us could, and, I'm missing, I want to have more. I don't want to just care for myself, I want to, I want to be able to care for myself and at the same time be able to take in life more. But I'm not doing, see I've closed it off, if I could figure out some way of doing that, then, you're smiling (C laughs), so that'd be just great.
T83: To be able to care for yourself, and yet open yourself up to life, and somehow that also tied up with the realization that, ¡°You know, death will come one day.¡± You'd like to live before you die.
C84: That's right, I want, I saw a card one time that said, ¡°Born, and then died.¡± And you open it up and it says, "In between, he lived" or something like that. That's what I would like for myself, a little life in between the born and the death, a little more life, and pleasure. See that's what I'm missing. Deep down inside is the, pleasure, experience of pleasure and joy, those kinds of experiences. I've been happy. I have fun. I do enjoy my children, but it's on a limited level.
T84: You don't really open yourself to joy. I guess fun, yes sure.
C85: But joy is on a deeper level, you see, so... I want to say, "But how've you been lately?" (C laughs).
T85: Well, ¡°Lets change the subject.¡± (T laughs).
C86: Yes, ¡°How's your wife, your house?¡± all that.
T86: Um, it'd be pretty nice to just, run away from some of this.
C87: It would, yes.
T87: Just talk.
C88: Well let¡¯s just have a rest for a while.
T88: I'm impressed with the fact that when you need a rest, you really take it.
C89: Oh, thank you. I was thinking my humor comes to the rescue, ¡°Give me a breather.¡±
T89: It's one of the ways in which you preserve yourself.
C90: That's right; I had a dream one time. And I dreamed that I was on a sled with two other girls, and we were going down a snowy hill. And we were going
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 65

too fast. And I told them to stop, they had to get off, otherwise they were going to crash into this train station at the bottom of the hill. And they wouldn't believe me. So I got off, and they went on. And I side-stepped in the snow all the way down the hill, but there were lots of trees where I was side stepping, and I was hanging onto the trees, one by one as I went down. And when I got to the bottom of the hill, the sled had crashed, or something. And then I thought to myself, ¡°That means, that has to do with me. Part of me would go too fast, and...¡±
T90: And, and this morning has been an example of the fact that you're not going to go so fast that you crash. (C: That's right.) You're going to go at your own pace if its step-by-step down the hill, oh, that's the pace you have.
C91: That must be it.
T91: Maybe that's a good stopping point. END
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy Interview, page 66

Rogers¡¯ Post-Session Commentary
I found it fascinating, the way in which this client very slowly lowers her defenses. I think those defenses could be broken through, but that in my estimation would not be as helpful as letting her proceed at her own pace. I think the client learns more that way. We did progress in the interview. We went from her perception of loneliness as her problem, to her fear of her relationships with men, to her feelings about letting the tender, vulnerable part of herself come out of a cave, to the recognition of the little girl in her that wants to be tenderly let out. She then began to get to the recognition of the deep, of the pain that is deep inside of her. That is unspeakable, almost unbearable. We saw her partially experience that pain, in spots, and then draw back. Then finally we saw the feelings that she has, that perhaps at bottom she is completely unlovable, one of the commonest feelings that people have. I thought that the dream at the end was almost a perfect description of the hour. She went deeper into herself, step-by-step, by slow degrees, cautiously and guardedly because she didn¡¯t want to crash into that pain. And she took resting times between the steps. So I thought that described the whole progress of the hour. I feel that it was a working interview, not highly dramatic, and much of therapy is work, and this was a good example of it. I felt present to her. I felt a companion in her exploration. If I were to continue to see her I think that she would gradua1ly move toward experiencing that care of herself of which she is quite frightened. I like the way we got into metaphors. Clients can say more in metaphors then they can say, than they dare to say openly. And I like the way I responded to the metaphors. I liked the way she was able to express her anger toward me whenever she felt it, whenever she felt that she was close to a dangerous part of her experiencing a painful part of her experiencing and that was easy for me to accept that anger. I felt good about this as a first interview.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Kathy, Post-Session Commentary, page 67

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 Carl Rogers' First Session with Dione (Code name) Dialogue from the film, ¡°The Right to be Desperate.¡± 1977
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (Producer). (1977). Carl Rogers counsels an individual on
anger and hurt [Film]. American Personnel and Guidance Association (American Association for Counseling and Development).]
The film includes stopped images with Rogers¡¯ voice giving comments about the interview. All of the dialogue of the interaction between Rogers and ¡°Dione¡± is included. The voiced over sections do not censor any parts of the interaction. They are in brackets and italics.
T: C 1: T1:
C 2: T2: C 3:
Well, I'm really glad to meet you.
Okay.
I've heard a few things about you, all good things, and I've also heard that you have leukemia but that you're in a state of remission, and that¡¯s all I know about you . . . so from there on ...
Okay.
Whatever we do is up to us. What things do you feel you want to talk about today?
I don't know. I was sitting in the room and waiting, before, and I was thinking about when I was about 7 or 8 years old. I remember reading a book, I believe. And I can't recall the name, by Jung, I think it was. I recalled that when I was reading it, at that time, I used to go down in the basement of my home and um, turn off all the lights. And in a way, that was kind of closing the outside world out (C: Mhm, hmm) and concentrating on what I wanted to do and what I wanted to be. And at 7 years old I was into that, and today I'm in the same position . . . um, really at this, you know, trying to find out what I want to do, what I want to be. And um, I've learned a lot of things. I've learned a lot of things since I found out that I have leukemia (T: Mhm, hmm) which is about a year ago this June . . . and I've learned an awful lot of things.
I'll bet. And you're going through a stage if I understand is a little bit like what it was at seven, sort of shutting out the world or shutting yourself into a space where
T3:
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 68

you're trying to figure out what it is that you want or who you are?
[Rogers¡¯ voice over a stopped image Commentary 1: Clearly he has rehearsed this first portion and yet, the material is of interest. Whether it's superficial or deep, I want to understand the exact meaning his experience has for him. Whether it's true or false, real or imaginary, this kind of presenting material is very common in first sessions, and is to be expected and to be respected.]
C 4:
I think that I've listened for so long to other people about who I was (T: Mhm, hmm) and I remember in 2nd grade I was a potential credit to my race. That was one of the . . . (T: Mhm, hmm) I used to wonder why I couldn't be a credit to somebody (T: laughs) else's race also. I think I was really conditioned to be something. To be some kind of a symbol, or (T: Mhm, hmm) whatever, and not really being a person, you know, I kind of missed out on my childhood to an extent. (T: Mhm, hmm) I don't really regret it. I don't think I regret it anyway, but I've really been through a lot of changes. And I think that now, after finding out I had leukemia and after dealing with the leukemia in the way I did, it's just really incredible, you see. It was last June when I found out, and um, I proceeded to get everything in order because I was told that I had less than a year to live. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, that was the trip. (T: I'll bet.) That was a trip.
A trip into a fairly dark place, I suppose.
Oh, yeah. For sure. For sure. On one hand I accepted the death. I, you know, at my young age I think I've lived long and a great deal. But that was the start of some things that really has had an effect on me today. (T: Mhm, hmm) I'm much happier than I've ever been . . . today. (T: Hmm) I'm much happier. (T: Hmm) But there's a lot of hurt too. There's an awful lot of hurt and I think I'm just beginning to realize that. Um, because you know, in being a credit to your race, in being an outstanding student, an outstanding scholar, an outstanding football player, whatever; it leaves you little room to be . . .
T 4: C 5:
T 5: You've been meeting other people's expectations of you and it seems that that's what you should do now. I guess you're really questioning that very much.
C 6:
Oh, yeah. Tremendously. And like you get into . . . the fun thing about it is that I'm finding out that some of the things that I think inside of me are okay. And like that isn't . . . you know, I feel okay, and I'm in a process of becoming okay. But like I haven't worked it out. Hurt is a hard thing to deal with. And like conditioning yourself to die (T: Mhm, hmm) is another thing, you know, you see, I didn't let my family in on that (T: Hmm) until March of this year. So it was some months before I. . .
T 6: You carried that within you.
C 7: Oh, yeah. But I proceeded very meticulously to carry out a plan, where my children
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 69

T 7: C 8:
would live in an area that I wanted them to live. And that, I was trying to control something after I died. Only when I went back this year in March to celebrate my children's birthday, and I had four weeks, incidentally, to live at that time; I was told on March 15 that I had four weeks to live. And it was really incredible because like, for the first time, I saw all my relatives and my friends. And they were coming in and they were very loving, very loving people, and very kind, you see. Um, but at the same time, they were all throwing flowers on my grave. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I don't think they knew that. And as a result, I got worse and I got worse, and um, I took a friend back. You see, I'd lived out here in California. um, after I found out that I had leukemia, I proceeded to develop a plan to move my family out here. (T: Mhm, hmm) And we moved out in approximately November after several trips out in the area. The trips were basically to find a doctor (T: Mhm, hmm) and also find in a way some kind of a hope. You see, (T: Mhm, hmm) I have this conditioned thing about being a fighter. So, on one hand I accept that, (T: Mhm, hmm) and on the other hand I was trying to do all I damned well could to live.
If it's going to be death, okay, you'll take it. But you're not going to take it unnecessarily.
No. Not at all.
[Rogers Commentary 2: I like the way I'm being a companion to him, trying to discover just how the prospect of death seems to him. I find that important because a client needs most to be understood in the darkest portions of his experience.]
C 9: You know, the thing that uh, you know, after I was sitting in there and I was thinking . . . I had really conditioned myself to, to really get ready and find the nearest cross and crawl up on that, and I've been doing that since I was seven years old, and I'm not sure why.
T 9: To really crucify yourself, is that what you're saying? Or to be a martyr? I'm not really sure . . .
C 10: Oh, I'm not really sure. But I think the activities I was involved in, in terms of trans-racial communication, (T: Mhm, hmm) working with groups, and helping people (T: Mhm, hmm) I would hope very similar to what people like yourself did. (T: Mhm, hmm) Um, always being available for everybody, all the time. (T: Mhm, hmm) I think that's being a martyr or (T: Yeah) something. Yeah.
T 10: Putting the other person first.
C 11: For sure. Yeah. Instead of saying, "Hey, there's some time for me." Because you see, I worked so hard and so long that it was just really, really difficult for me to get used to, you know, being sick, not working' and not being in control (T: Mhm, hmm) because I definitely was not in control. (T: Mhm, hmm) And there were a lot of things that I did that I am not really very pleased about. (T: Mhm, hmm) But you
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 70

know, after thinking about it for just a little while, or whatever, one of the things I miss you know, I guess maybe from not telling people or whatever, about I was ill . . . but uh, after I told them, some months later, when I had four weeks to live, I didn¡¯t find anybody that allowed me to be desperate, that could understand some of the things that I didn't want to do. (T: Mhm, hmm) And that brought on another guilt trip. (T: Mhm, hmm) And so now I'm in the process of kind of washing all that stuff out.
T 11: Mhm, hmm. Is that part of the hurt? You referred earlier to hurt and I didn't quite understand that. (C: Mhm, hmm) I can understand the feeling of desperateness and also I can understand how hard it would be to have no one really understand that feeling in you.
[Rogers Commentary 3: I can let him feel desperate. Friends and family cannot allow this. It's important that someone can really permit it. I also go back to his earlier feeling of hurt, I wanted to get a more complete feeling for his inner world but he, as you will see, doesn't pick up on this particular portion.]
C 12: I've lost my father-in-law, which was a terrible loss to me, and it was a loss that I never could talk to my wife or anybody else about. (T: Hmm. Mhm, hmm) And I gave a lot to that family, you know, for five or, I don't know, seven years I guess. And when I went back, there were just some things that happened that they showed me there wasn't, there wasn't very much of a connection. There wasn't very much of a connection between, between all of that love and whatever that I put in, and then all of a sudden you know, I became just another uh, you know, I became just another black person. I became just another nigger. You know, and I think it's important to understand that my wife is you know, is white, German Irish. (T: Mhm, hmm. I see.) And I think that's a part of that whole thing. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) Um, when we first married, you know, my father-in-law, we just fought tooth and nail, but then after that we loved each other . . . for about six long, good, hard years. And basically, he was my only connection and when he died . . . I found that there was no support. (T: Mhm, hmm) There was absolutely no support.
T 12: And I, I imagine . . . or perhaps I catch a little bit of resentment, that you really poured a lot of love and caring into that family and had gotten some back from him, but after his death, none of it paid off for you in any way.
C 13: Right. For sure. Yeah, I think that, you know, what I wanted, what I wanted more than anything else, was just to you know, I guess, was love. I guess it was that mutualness, you know, what I felt for each of them. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, I thought that was not only my responsibility, but you know, it was very natural for me to care about people (T: Mhm, hmm) that were very close to my wife (T: Mhm, hmm) at that time.
T 13: So it hurt not to get that love back. It wasn't mutual.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 71

C 14: Oh yeah. For sure it did.
[Rogers Commentary 4: I always try to sense the feelings just below his words and he welcomes that. I try to catch the resentment and the hurt which he hasn't yet voiced very clearly.]
C 15: And there were various things that happened in terms of things that were happening back east . . . that people were wondering why I had left, you know, a good position and all that kind of garbage. And uh, because, see, I hadn't told anybody that I had leukemia. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, one thing led to another. And there were stories that needed, I think to um, I think every story, every situation needs to have two sides. (T: Mhm, hmm) And there was only one side and I was, I was hurt because I didn't have my chance.
T 15: You never were heard.
C 16: Never. And, but at the same time, like, in a way, in a way, I used to feel that I put myself in that position. Because no one knew what was happening inside of me, you see. Because I had to take care of myself. And I had to be better than everybody else. Because I was always told that. You can, in a majority society I had to be 100, 200 percent better than my white counterpart (T: Mhm, hmm) or my brown counterpart, (T: Mhm, hmm) or whatever. I had to do that, because that's what it took to survive .
T 16: Mhm, hmm. And in striving for that, one reason you really weren't heard was that you didn't dare express the person you were, the sick person you were at that time.
C 17: Oh, no. Not at - I really, I really had a fear of that. You know? (T: Mhm, hmm) I really, I guess, didn't trust some things that were happening, (T: Mhm, hmm) um, gee, at a whole global level, you know. But to, then to entrust that kind of information (T: Mhm, hmm) to other people. (T: Mhm, hmm) I was very uneasy about that. (T: Frightening) Very uneasy about that. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I did a lot of things that I didn't, didn't really want to do (T: Mhm, hmm) because I was very desperate. Um, I gave up my, my job and came out here, and I did consultant work and so forth, but I had to use a great deal of money for diagnosticians or (T: Mhm, hmm) whatever and, and, and all kinds of little gimmicks to keep me alive. (T: Mhm, hmm) And consequently I had to borrow money. And when I borrowed that money, I didn't borrow it in a way that would say to you like, "Hey, uh, Ted or whatever, I need, you know X amount of dollars, you know, and like . . . 'cause I've got, I have leukemia," and so forth. I'm scared to death to say that, you know? (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, I needed some money because of uh, I think I must have invented about ten stories, you know. And I think about it and you know, like, I felt real bad about that, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, because like I had developed a professional uh, attitude I think, about myself, or at least a kind of . . . I had a lot of respect from a lot of people. (T: Mhm, hmm) And you know, I really did have that . . . I don¡¯t know if that was love or caring or whatever, but it was
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 72

respect. (T: Yeah) When I got involved with money, the situation with money, I had to borrow money and I really couldn't tell. And in a way, you know, I really wanted to tell, but I hadn't even told my wife (T: Yeah) and my family. (T: Yeah) And I said, okay, well one thing, you know, and I'm gonna, I'm going to be okay, and this money is going to be here, and everything else like that and I think that's a part of, uh, me that I really, I'm not really sure, that ah, you know, is really acceptable you know, because I have to be perfect.
T 17: Yeah. Yeah. So, it's not acceptable even to you to do some of the things you did, and also I gather to live behind that facade of falsehood for quite awhile . . . not telling anybody what the score was.
C 18: Oh yeah. For sure. Very true. I . . .
[Rogers Commentary 5: The hurt and fear of revealing himself as ill is almost worse than
the illness]
C 19: That was very difficult. The most difficult part, I think, of (T: Mhm, hmm) I think it was the most difficult part of my illness. It was that, "Hey, I couldn't have cancer," you know. That's like having V.D. and three kinds of V.D. at the same time. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, how do you tell someone, "I have leukemia . . . I have less than a year to live, or whatever (T: Mhm, hmm) . . . and I need some money." (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, it's like when people you know, look at a drinking glass or whatever, and you know, after you told them you have cancer . . . and they make kind of a . . . shy away from your drinking glasses.
T 19: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. How could you possibly let anybody know where you were physically?
[Rogers Commentary 6: One of the hardest things for a dying person is the reaction that others have to him. So, when he's talking of death and dying, I feel it's highly important to be right with him; to recognize and accept his feelings.]
C 20: I really don't know. I really, you know, I've really tried to debate this thing in myself for a long time, and I really, I really don't know how I could have done anything any other way, because, you see, it was my character (T: Mhm, hmm) to not, I never . . . I'm always there to help other people. (T: Mhm, hmm) I wasn't there for . . . to say, "Hey, you know, I need some nourishment right now, whatever, you know."
T 20: You've just had no experience in being the needy person that needed help and needed . . .
C 21: Absolutely. Even when I needed money or whatever, I didn't need money (T: Yeah) because of my health. (T: Mhm, hmm) It was because of maybe bad business experience or an investment, or something or other . . . and like, for the
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 73

people who trusted that kind of information or whatever . . . like I, you know, well, I'm going to deal with that. I'm going to deal with that. But that's not in my character, it's never been in my character. (T: Mhm, hmm) I had to keep that image. (T: Mhm, hmm) I had to keep the image. (T: Mhm, hmm) And uh, it cost me my family, a couple children, you know. I guess that was the most important thing that it cost me. I think the other things are really not that important. But, but what it did do, what the leukemia did do . . . it helped me to, to understand that I'm just an ordinary human being like everybody else. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) You know, and sometimes you know, like, everybody has problems, and so forth, but at the same time it was like, it was my character to do that. You know, I wouldn't tell them. No. For what?
T 21: But it sounds as though the leukemia helped you to really destroy the notion of you as the "image."
C 22: I think, I think it did. I think it did. Finally, at the end it did. I use the end . . . the four weeks when I was told I had four weeks to live (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) that was the end, at the end of the leukemia. Even though I'm in remission now, (T: Mhm, hmm) I don't plan to, I don't . . . you see, I haven't told you that I went to, I went for the tests and gave enormous amounts of blood. I don't know where they were sending that blood or what they were doing with it. I gave an extraordinary amount, but nothing, nothing was coming of that. But you know, one of the things I did know that if I went to the hospital, if I did what the doctors said, I'd probably die. And it's almost like, you know, when you first become an agnostic in school, or whatever, you know, you go through . . . like I went through all this religious training, whatever. . . and I said, "I don't think that there's a God." Or, "that isn't really important, or whatever." (T: Mhm, hmm) But then at the same time, I hold back, you know. And every now and then I give an occasional prayer (T: Right) just in case.
T 22: Play it safe.
C 23: For sure. I think that's what I was also doing in terms of the leukemia. I really did. I had . . . the logical end to leukemia that my uncle and cousin had had before me was to die. (T: Mhm, hmm) Was to die. And now I think I know some things about that, though, that you don't have to die. Because it wasn't until I saw everybody throwing leaves and things on my grave that I really understood that I had the power to do that, and that, by lying for money, was probably worse for me than . . . than the leukemia, I think. (T: Hmm) I don¡¯t know if that makes any sense . . .
T 23: Yeah. It does.
C 24: Now I said it. (laughs)
T 24: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm. Somehow, what I get out of it is that being kind of false to yourself really was more of a burden to you, causes you more concern, than the
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 74

fact that you had leukemia. C 25: Oh, for sure. For sure.
[Rogers Commentary 7: I think this is the first time he voices a feeling that he has not realized before. That's a significant point in any first interview.]
C 26: The other thing was that I was about ready to leave my children, you know, very young, beautiful children . . . children that I'd brought into the world to do the same kind of, kind of thing that I was doing, you know . . . to take the world on their back (T: Mhm, hmm) and change things. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, and now that helped me now with my kids in the sense of I don't think I want to raise my children like that.
T 26: Mhm, hmm. You don't want them to carry the kind of burden and image that you carried.
C 27: No. Not at all. (T: Mhm, hmm) Not because they're part Indian. Not because they're part black. Or not because they're third world or whatever. They don't have to carry that burden of trying to change and always being the recipient of certain policies and things like that and always being controlled. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) And I never really, it made me feel apart . . . because I don't know if my second grade teacher thought they were doing me a favor by telling me I was a credit to my race, (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) but then . . . they certainly did, and I didn't feel good about it then. (T: Mhm, hmm) (Sigh) That's a start. (T: Mhm, hmm)
[Rogers Commentary 8: He has come to the end of his rehearsed part and now he is in new territory. I'm comfortable with the silence and I'm eager to see where he goes next. It's his choice.]
C 28: And I remember talking to a person when I came down. I'd just discovered I was in remission, and I was hobbling on a cane, and so forth, and God, the first thing I did down here was to take a motorcycle ride. Now, for me, that was radical. (T: Mhm, hmm) For me, that was extremely radical, but it was fun (T: Mhm, hmm) you know, and it was one of the first fun things that I did. (T: Mhm, hmm) Since I was ill, you know, because on top of having the leukemia I was fighting a divorce and having my property ripped away from me, you know, and having married into a family, and a family that was a different race than I was, and I learned later, as my wife told me that she didn't know that a whole community wanted to divorce. (T: Laughs) Like they were married. And I was hurt by that too. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) You know, how very good, (T: Mhm, hmm) Christian, (T: Mhm, hmm) upstanding people (T: Mhm, hmm) can make some pretty serious judgments without knowing you know, the whole story.
T 28: And I catch a note of bitterness there. A feeling that they really make judgments without, without knowing the picture.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 75

C 29: For sure. For sure. Well, the thing that was incredible was that I didn't . . . forgot about, I guess is that to understand, that you know, . . . I forgot for maybe a couple of years - Now, I'm going to oversimplify this next thing (T: Mhm, hmm) . . . but I forgot that I was black, (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) in that family, in that community, (T: Mhm, hmm) or whatever, you see. (T: Mhm, hmm) And then I quickly learned that I . . .
T 29: And then you were reminded all over again.
C 30: Oh, for sure. For sure. And I think that also caused a lot of bitterness or whatever. (R Mhm, hmm) And that kind of stuff I want to get out of me. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) You know, I can't deal with that . . . someone else's trip on me. Because I really don't hate anybody for that or whatever. A lot of the things I've brought on myself. But at the same time, I think I really do have the right at that time to have been desperate.
T 30: Yeah.
C 31: And I didn't really understand that.
[Rogers Commentary 9: This is a real step in self-acceptance: the acceptance of himself as a desperate person.]
C 32: It was just, you know, hey it was so bad, it got so bad . . . this whole trip of leukemia . . . and lying and things like that or whatever, that I don't know. I thought, "Well, if I can just get ahead a little bit, and make enough money to pay off all those people or whatever, or, and even in my will and with my insurance" (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) You know, I made sure that all of the people were going to be paid or whatever (T: Mhm, hmm) but, you know. I still wasn't, it still wasn't acceptable to me for some reason . . . I didn't want to go out owing anybody or (T: Mhm, hmm) whatever, because that wasn't, wouldn't be the American thing to do, I guess at that time.
T 32: That wouldn't be living up to the standards you've set for yourself and other people have set for you.
C 33: Oh. Yeah. For sure. And like, I'm a little tired of those standards. (T: Mhm, hmm) I'm really a little tired (T: Mhm, hmm) of those standards. And I basically think that the kind of things that um, . . . me and what I'm into, and what turns me on . . . is good for me. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I don't really know why I went into remission. You know, I have some feelings about that . . . you know, personal, religious, whatever. But I think a great part of that had something to do with deciding that I wanted to live.
T 33: Mhm, hmm. Perhaps, sounds as though you're saying several things here, that Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 76

perhaps deciding you wanted to live made a real difference. And also deciding that what you were experiencing as your needs and your wants and so on, really had some validity.
C 34: Yeah. It's really good to hear you say that. Because I really feel that. Because what I did I think was . . .
[Rogers Commentary 10: It is so good to feel understood. It's releasing. It shows the value of really getting inside the client's world and understanding it and communicating that understanding to the client.]
-
[Rogers Commentary 11: Little by little he is experiencing his bitterness, and his real desperation.]
C 37: My phone bill had to be about $1,500 a month you know, because I was so worried about (T: Mhm, hmm) the children, you know.
T 37: Mhm, hmm. So that was a big, heavy burden too, then huh?
C 38: Oh, yeah. Yeah, it really was pretty heavy. It was pretty heavy.
[Rogers Commentary 12: This is the first comfortable pause. I feel he is kind of catching up with himself and with the feelings he has voiced.]
End of Part 1 (End of first reel of the film)
T 38: Life has been a very fluctuating up and down, kind of
C 39: For sure. But the leukemia took me away from Michigan, which I have . . . oh, bless somebody for that. And if you know, I only live a couple of more months, or whatever, it's a lot better (T: Mhm, hmm) than living under uh, constant stress (T: Mhm, hmm) you know of worrying about not being accepted, or not being accepted.
T 39: But that's one good thing that the leukemia did for you.
C 40: Yeah. It really was. Because I got a divorce out of it. My goodness, I got to California. Um, and I really mean that.
[Rogers Commentary 13: Previously, the divorce was a hurt. Here it sounds more like a blessing. I wish to follow and be with each feeling as it arises no matter how ephemeral it may be.]
C 41: But even when I say it, you know, there's . . . it was a rough, scratchy, scratchy road . . . and you know, it's extremely difficult for me to talk about it now. (T:
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 77

Mhm, hmm) It really is .
[Rogers Commentary 14: Notice how his speech has slowed down. It shows he's working on himself. A client's whole speech pattern changes when he's exploring difficult new terrain.]
C 42: In getting all those bad things out, I'm not sure in terms of how to deal (T: Mhm, hmm) yet, or whatever. And I'm really not sure. But there are some you know, some things you know, like, I've really got to come to grips with it. "Well, finally," you know. Because they're still, you know, when I talk to my wife from 3,000 miles away and she tells me about what her mother thinks and all sorts of other things, or whatever, I get sick. It happened yeah . . . it happened the other day. She called and everything was really great and then she'd begin to talk about a lot of other people, and what their attitudes and what their opinions was. That night I got very little sleep and was ready to go back to the hospital and was ready to have leukemia too. (T: Mhm, hmm) I was ready. You know?
T 42: So you feel as though in some sense you prepare the readiness for the illness, or you, are taking in something from outside; it makes you ready to have it.
C 43: It seems like it. You know, I didn't believe that. I didn't believe that statement that you just made, some time ago, (T: Mhm, hmm) but I believe it now. (T: Mhm, hmm) I believe it.
[Rogers Commentary 15: A fascinating awareness of the psychological source of his symptoms.]
C 44: You know, I recall when I went back, and, and, and um, for the first time, my parents had learned that I had leukemia. You know, what do you say to your mother? What do you say to your father? I remember I got a phone call. And I was staying at my wife's house where we were going, keep in mind now, we were going through a divorce, the whole bit, and were, uh celebrating my children's birthday at the same time. My mother calls. "We're coming over." Nobody at the house. All of a sudden I lose my . . . my vision goes. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, that was one of the symptoms (T: Mhm, hmm) of leukemia. And uh, and, it scare-, it scared the hell out of me (T: Mhm, hmm) like I really wanted to run. But I couldn't run, I couldn't see. (T: Couldn't see.) And um, it was only when I got back to California that I tried to put that together, you know (T: Mhm, hmm) of what happened when (T: Mhm, hmm) in terms of you know, the paralysis that I had in terms of my legs. It's incredible, it really seemed like somehow, somehow I've got control of that, in some way but I mean I'm not really sure. But I'm convinced that I have control. (T: Mhm, hmm) But I'm not sure how. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know. (T: Mhm, hmm)
T 44: I gather you feel that where before these things happened to you because of what happened to you from the outside, now you are beginning to feel control over it yourself . . . from the inside. Is that, is that part of what you're saying?
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 78

C 45: I think that's what I'm saying.
[Rogers Commentary 16: This raises the whole question of what is illness? In what sense is it psychological and what sense is it physical? I can only go with the psychological reality as he presents it to me.]
C 46: When I'm positive and when I¡¯m doing things that I enjoy, I don't have symptoms (T: Mhm, hmm) anymore. (T: Mhm, hmm) I don't have symptoms. And I don't you know, like, when I came down here, the doctors wanted me to have transfusions and things like that, you know, and I remember one doctor saying to me, "I don't know really who's got you into playing this tennis and all that, or whatever, but you really need to come in here and have a transfusion." I said, "For what? I'm doing okay." "To be on the safe side." You know? (T: Mhm, hmm) That's . . . well, I won't say what that is. (Rogers laughs) But, you know, like, to some extent though, that confirms some things to me about not trusting doctors to take care of myself. (T: Mhm, hmm) I'm talking about the leukemia. (T: Yeah) I'm certainly not trying to indict all doctors or the medical profession (T: Sure) by what happened to me, (T: Mhm, hmm) you know, I think, I hope, in some way that other people who have life-threatening illnesses can deal with it because I think I have, and I do have that control. And like, since I was 7, to some extent, when I went down in that basement and turned that light off, or whatever, and I shut the outside world off . . . or whatever, somehow I've lost that . . . because somehow in the process of becoming educated and socialized, and whatever, (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) I let other people control what I wanted and what I wanted to do. And I really . . . I did. That was a . . . Jesus, that was a, yeah, well, okay.
T 46: That has a lot of meaning to me, and I want to make sure I'm getting it straight. Down in that basement as a 7-year old with the lights out . . . you were really finding yourself and, I gather, trusting yourself. (C: Mhm, hmm) And then life was, said to you, "No, no, don't do that. We have the standards for you. Live up to our expectations. You've got to be the image. You've got to be just right. And everything." And now you are gradually recapturing what you felt as a 7-year old.
C 47: I believe that to be true. Because even though that you know, the responsibility, you know, it was like something inside of me could touch something that wasn't seen . . . when I was seven. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) And I can't remember what the book was that Young wrote, or whatever. (T: Mhm, hmm) But it had an extraordinary effect on me, this seven- year-old, you know? (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, I started writing poetry. My first poem. But I guess I did lose it. I did lose it. Like I still had it, but all this garbage about me being . . .
T 47: It was well buried?
C 48: Yeah. Yeah. And then other people were shaping me up by saying, well, you know, "You're really good if you do it this way, or whatever."
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 79

T 48: "You're a credit to your race."
C 49: Oh, yeah. "You're extraordinary. You're a credit to your race." You know, and, I don't know. Maybe they meant very well, or whatever, but it didn't do the job. It didn't do the job, you know, because in a way, by accepting that kind of praise, and their kind of . . . buying into their kind of system, or whatever, like, I gave up something that I knew already at 7 years old.
T 49: And that something, as I get it, is you were giving up something of yourself. C 50: Yeah. I've . . . sounds good. Yeah, I did. I did.
[Rogers Commentary 17: This really touches him. He¡¯s letting it sink in. He's experiencing his loss of self. This is the very heart of therapy. When I can provide a climate in which the client can experience his buried feelings rather than describe them or be told about them, it has a much more powerful and enduring effect.]
C 51: You know, maybe I'd have been better off if I'd just gone on and lived my life rather than try to live other people's lives or whatever, you know. But I gave up being happy myself. You know, I didn't expect you know, I guess I didn't expect myself to be happy, or to really maybe deserve happiness, or something.
T 51: Sounds like you wanted so much to help people, that ah helping yourself didn't fit into that picture at all.
C 52: Not at all. Not at all. There was enough to do without worrying about your own (T: Mhm, hmm) little problems and things like that (T: Mhm, hmm) at that time, so I said to myself then, you know? Oh, yeah. A lot of things are racing through my mind as we talk and, but there are certain things that go through this whole thing that I pick out in terms of when I was seven, and those are just really important times for me, you know. They were important times in terms of when I was alone, and when I was sure, and when I felt good and I felt a part of the you know, the stars, the universe. I really did feel that. You know, I remember I used to go out when I was 7, 8, 9 years old . . . three or four o'clock in the morning, look up in that beautiful sky and see those stars (T: Mhm, hmm) or whatever, (T: Mhm, hmm) and I'd say, "That's mine over there and I'm going to be there." And I felt good. I felt I don't know, in a sense integrated, more integrated than after . . . and as I continued (T: Mhm, hmm) to do this and fill out the forms for a scholarship, or things like that, I lost it. I really lost it.
T 52: At seven, you were really a part of the universe and you knew it.
C 53: That's what I thought. But you know, what does a 7 year old know, you know, I don't know.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 80

[Rogers Commentary 18: This has been a marvelous picture of the wholeness of the child and it's description by society. I'm trying as in all my therapy to help him get back to the kind of realness he had as a child.]
C 54: I think I did. Yes, I knew it. I knew it because I knew, because I was always drawn to the stars, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm) It wasn't anything like my parents would wake me up in the middle of the night, or whatever, I woke up; I don't know why.
T 54: It was something that you wanted to do. It was something you had a view. Not because somebody else said, "Hey you should be interested in the stars or something like that."
C 55: For sure. For sure. And I was, I think at that time I was really the best person that I could be. And you know, I guess, for some reason, I don't want to heap it on everybody else you know, but I was just taught, conditioned or something that . . . to not trust that anymore. (T: Mhm, hmm) To . . . you know. (T: Uh, huh) It's like those things when you're young you hold onto or whatever.
T 55: "But then, that's just childish. That's just . . . "
C 56: Right. Right. Yeah.
T 56: "Don't trust that stuff." (C: Mhm, hmm) "They're telling you what's right." (C: Yeah.)
C 57: Yeah, yeah. I've really suppressed . . . I guess a hell of a lot of anger. 'Cause you know, when you said that, you know, I felt you know, like . . . you know, I think of all kind of words now.
[Rogers Commentary 19: Speaking in society's voice when I said, "Oh that's just childishness, they're telling you what is right." There's something intuitive on my part but it released his anger. I like to follow my intuition and I've learned to trust it.]
C 58: Really for sure. You¡¯re a minority . . . and in terms of a minority within a minority within a minority. Like mother's Osage. She's part Indian, (T: Mhm, hmm) her family . . . that history. (T: Mhm, hmm) Father a descendant of black slaves. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know? And then being picked out, you know? (T: Mhm, hmm) Because that's what it was, you know, 'cause I knew what was happening to other people in the class, whether they were white or black or whatever. But it was . . . you know, but I always really understood that I had to be 200 percent better than everybody else so I'd achieve. I almost killed myself playing football because I wanted to be the littlest superstar, whatever that means. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) It's crazy things. You know, it was that competitiveness, or whatever, you know. And it was that I wouldn't have anything if I didn't compete and if I didn't do it like, you know, somebody else told me to do. (T: Mhm, hmm) I guess.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 81

T 58: So those standards and what they did to you really, really dominated your life, if I get it right.
C 59: I think so. I really think so. I, I uh, my reference point became . . . and I guess I bought into that. You know, I really bought into that. And I really, it really seems foreign to me now. It seems as foreign, I think, as leukemia, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know I've . . . it really does, you know.
T 59: Yeah. One way of putting it is I feel you are saying, "Damn it, that seven year old was more right than all that's gone on in between."
C 60: Yeah. Yeah. And maybe trying to get back to that, and whatever, and now and uh, you know, I just wonder how, how that person at 7 would have been dealing with the leukemia and all those other problems now. (T: Mhm, hmm) It would have been interesting, I think. Probably would've handled it much better. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) (Pause 7 seconds) (Laughs) Feel some kind of release. I don't know.
[Rogers Commentary 20: Notice how his voice has slowed, become more thoughtful and calm. He's getting closer to himself by revealing some of himself. And it feels good.]
C 61: I told a lot of people you know, about um, about me. You know, and something that came out you know, and that other part of me may be . . . I'm really wondering about trusting too, right now. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know (T: Mhm, hmm) 'cause I've trusted a lot of other people, too. (T: Mhm, hmm)
T 61: And so you're wondering, "Yeah, but can I trust him?"
C 62: Hmm. Well . . .
T 62: Maybe part of that reason is you feel, "My God, I've told him a lot. I've trusted him. Have I trusted him too much?"
C 63: Sure. Well, I guess I'm just going to have to deal with it in terms of do I trust myself to tell you. (T: Mhm, hmm) You know, but I do have that, you know. I have that history. (Laughs)
[Rogers Commentary 21: Is it safe to trust me with this more vulnerable part of himself? Clients often have such doubts and I respond in a way which helps him to realize that I recognize and accept that question.]
C 64: You know, . . . but I've really been you know, like a lot of other people, like a lot of other people, you know, or whatever. But I've learned so many things from this, this whole thing, or whatever, you know. And even just sitting here and talking with you, whether you're Carl Rogers or Jesus Christ or whatever, you know . . .
T 64: Or Joe Doakes.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 82

C 65: Or whomever, you know, it's a, still it's a very difficult thing for me to . . .
T 65: Yeah. Yeah.
C 66: And I don't know if I just haven't allowed myself to be open, you know, and to be needy or whatever. But is that junk? That "credit to . . ." You know, that really makes me mad. That really made me mad. I mean, I keep, in mind as I'm talking, it keeps coming back to me, you know. "Credit to my race, to my race." I remember that teacher so well, with big boobs, and she put my head right in them and said I was a credit to her race. And you know, that . . . oh, that burned me up.
T 66: So as you get deeper into that feeling it isn't just that you, earlier, you said you wondered if it was wise of her to do that. Now you know, "Damn it, I'm really angry at her for doing that to me."
C 67: Yeah. And I'm even more angrier when I see it happening all the time. And I don't want it to happen to my kids. (T: Mhm, hmm) And I didn't really want my kids to be a credit to their race. You know? (T: Mhm, hmm) And I know that now. Getting militant. (Laughter)(Pause 6 seconds)(Sigh)
[Rogers Commentary 22: He finds it very hard to experience his anger. He only talks about it rather coolly. The sigh though, is one of real letting down. A relaxing, a trusting. We really are in relationship.]
T 67: Our time's about up and I don't know if there¡¯s more you want to say now for today, okay. Or if not, we can call it quits for today.
C 68: Well I'd like to be able to tell you something.
T 68: All right.
C 69: That is going to make me feel good. That is going to continue to have me feel positive about myself and to grow and to be nourished or whatever, but I'm really not sure what to say. You know, but I really want to do that, so that I can continue to live, you know. (T: Mhm, hmm. Mhm, hmm) That's important to me, and so (T: Mhm, hmm) um, but it's just not coming. But I think I really want to say that and be comfortable in saying, you know, "I got raked over the coals and I resent it and I'm mad and I'm angry and I need to get that to be angry (T: Okay) You know. (T: Mhm, hmm)
T 69: "Okay. I was really screwed by a lot of people, and I have reason to be angry, and I am angry, and I need to say that." I can hear the anger in there.
C 70: Yeah. But you know how I haven't said it yet, though, you know. I really haven't. You know, I think it um, I think it's just a part of being civilized maybe.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 83

T 70: Mhm, hmm. You're talking about it in a very civilized fashion. (C: Right) Living up to those standards.
C 71: Yeah. Which I'd like to just go back and kick some butts, I think. (Sigh) Well, enough of the militancy.
T 71: Okay? Shall we call it quits for today? C 72: Yeah. I think so.
T 72: Alright good. See you tomorrow.
[Rogers Commentary 23: He has revealed more of himself than he expected to. He's going from a presentation of himself to exploring himself. From talking politely to talking honestly about anger. I believe this has happened because I've followed every feeling I could even when he seems to be scattered, to be talking about several different things, I've tried to stay with and respond to the most central of his feelings. I feel like we've made a start. On a more intellectual level, this session provides dramatic evidence of the theory that the child is open to all experiencing. That he or she feels the locus of evaluation is in the self. Then the family, the educational system and the culture pound home the lesson, "Don't believe in your own experience but learn to live by others' expectations. Then you'll be rewarded by love." Therapy means slowly discarding those introjections and gradually recapturing the person as he was in his childhood.]
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 1st Interview, page 84

   This transcript is available for purposes of research, study and teaching. It may not be sold.
Throughout this interview the responses of the therapist (T) (Rogers), and the client (C) are numbered for easy reference.
 Carl Rogers Counsels an Individual on Anger and Hurt (Film) (Code name-Dione) Second Interview -- 1977
[Source: Whiteley, J. M. (Producer). (1977). Carl Rogers counsels an individual on anger and hurt [Film]. American Personnel and Guidance Association.]
[Rogers: This is the second interview with a young man who reports he has leukemia, but is in a state of remission. In his first interview he realized that the self he had at age 7, was a very precious self and that social expectations caused him to lose it. He had also approached the feelings of anger he has felt about what has been done to this self and to him. But he has not yet expressed his anger. Now the second sessions begins.]
T1: O.K. Where do you want to start this morning?
C2: Uh, I don't know. I wa ... I was thinking that when we ... when we talked earlier about the, the anger ... (T: Mmm.) I've been thinking a great deal about that.
T2: I've thought a lot about what you had to say about that.
C3: Right, you know, and I'm not sure that, uh, that I really don't want to be angry, you know, and I'm not sure if anger ... being angry now, is a part of the process and I've got to do that, but I'd like to ... I guess my uh ... I guess my mind uh academically or something, you know, and something other than emotion or whatever, like, would like to tell me that, uh, I'd like to uh ... to not be angry and to skip over that part, if that's a part of the process, you know? But I'm not sure I can do that (small laugh), you know.
T3: Your mind says sort of, "Oh, cool it. Don't ... don't get into uh, such strong emo- tion".
C4: For sure. It almost seems like that ... that uh whatever is happening in my environment or whatever happened in my environment is pulling me into again uh, that kind of a trap ... that kind of a system that I don't particularly care ... er, er, you know, if you know what I mean.
T4: Mmm. I think I get that: that your ... your mind is taking the place of the system in saying now, uh, "Play it right. Do the right ... do the proper thing".
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 85

C5: Right.
T5: But some other part of you is saying, "Yeah, but there's some anger there". C6: For sure. For sure.
T6: There's some real anger there.
C7: Right. It's ... it's almost like in this country ... and, and I've always felt like this ... you only have about two options, you know, when you deal with race ... you either have to be ... you're either a racist or you're an anti-racist. (T: Mmm.) And that doesn't really seem to be the kind of thing that I'm, you know .... I don't really care to be an anti-racist, if you know what I mean (T: Mmm.) anymore. Uh, and I don't wanna be a reflection of any other ... of any other larger society at all. (T: Mmm.) I really don't want to ...
T7: You'd like to get in touch with what's going on in you. C8: For sure.
T8: Not ... not some label or other.
C9: For sure. I think that I could probably trust that a lot better than, than, than trusting what's happening or what has happened. (T: Mmm.) And, um, and when I think about that ... when I think about all of that, you know, uh, the things that we talked about ... I, I, I think that, um, that's worse than the leukemia.
T9: Uh, uh-huh.
C10: You know? I know that may sound very strange or whatever, but a lot of things have been strange
T10: Mmm. Mmm.
C11: You know, since this time; and, and what has happened to me didn't just start when I found out that I, you know, was going to die. (T: Mmm.) Kind of thing.
T11: Let me see if I understand that. That you feel as though, um, what the culture and people and so on have ... have done to you ... that's really caused you more suffering than the leukemia. Is that what you're saying?
C12: I think so. (T: Mmm.) I think so. And to some extent that ... that would ... that is mild ... like, for instance, you know, you ... I don't know what would have happened if I had died or if I will or whatever, but I certainly know what's happening now and what happened.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 86

T12: Mmm. C13: You see. T13: Mmm.
C14: And to some extent that ... that kind of leukemia, that kind of deterioration of the body is the same kind of thing that happened to my mind. (T: Mmm.) And um ... (T: Mmm.) You know, it¡¯s ...
T14: So really, what the culture did to you was give you a cancer of the mind.
C15: Yeah. I, I, I, I really ... I think, I really want to say that and I really want to, um, and I believe it, you know, and I guess that part of me that's, that's my culture or is a part of the total, ... is saying that it's not all that good to be angry, you know, because militancy is frowned upon or whatever, you know. (T: Mmm, mmm, mmm.) And I guess I'm using mili- militant in my sense because of ... it's, it's just traditionally, you know, when blacks become angry they're, they're not angry ... they're militant. (T: Mmm.) You know what I mean (slight laughter)?
T15: I know. Another label.
C16: Mmm. For sure, for sure, for sure. Yeah. And I ... and there's nobody that I can put my finger on, you know ... that person that started the whole thing ... that process, you know, because that would probably be a lot better for me, you know, then I probably would, would try to, to do ... to do that person in.
T16: Yeah ... If you could ... (C: You know?) If you could pin it on one person, then your rage would be justified and you could really get after that person.
C17: Mmm. But how, you know ... but how do you blame somebody else who's sick? (T: Mmm.) You know? And I think that people that do that to other people, or at least - when it was done to me, um ... they're really sick, you know. And here I am, you know, trying to ... you know, I don't know if it was forgiving, I don't know if I'm sounding confused or whatever, maybe, you know, but trying to accept their sickness, you know.
T17: Mmm.
C18: And at the same time, you know, I really haven't had the opportunity of letting anybody accept mine.
T18: Mmm.
C19: OrmaybeIhaven'tgivenittothem,but...
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 87

T19: Yeah, maybe you haven't given it to them.
C20: Right.
T20: That's what I sense is going on now ... that you feel "there's so many reasons why I really shouldn't express my anger. I'll, I'll talk about all those reasons".
C21: Yeah (small laugh), for sure. I don't know really, you know. Maybe I'll just be angry one day (small laugh) and maybe I'll really feel better or whatever, you know, and, and I ... when I, when I smile, I ... I'm uh, you know, I'm smiling but there¡¯s a lot of ... and I'm sure you know that ... there's a lot of anger there. (T: Mmm.) You know, but it's not my nature to be angry (T: Mmm.) It's not my nature to be angry, but I feel angry.
T21: Yeah. Um, and uh so I hear you explaining and explaining that uh, uh, "that's not my nature to be angry. It's just that I am angry right now".
C22: For sure (slight laugh), for sure. And to try to be angry in a productive ... I don't know how you'd be angry in a productive way ... you know, in terms of ... It's like now when I ... when I respond to people, you know ... if, if when you encounter people, you know, whether it's in the street, whether it's in a professional situation or whatever, you know ...if people send out certain messages and wh ... no matter what they're saying or whatever ... there are certain kinds of messages that I'm getting, you know. They're saying that, "hey, you know ... that isn't for me" kind of thing, you know. And that's before, you know, I'd like to work with that, and ride it ... like to try to communicate without alienating ... (T: Mmm.) people or whatever, but now, you know, I'm ending up saying, you know, like ..."hey, that's a bunch of crap", (T: Mmm.) you know. "Don't ... don't, don't tell me about the way that I should do it or, or give me all that nonverbal stuff about, um, you saying that I'm OK, but by nonver- bally saying ... "hey", you know, "you're really not OK", you know. And I don't want to hear that kind of stuff anymore.
T22: I get what you're saying and I also feel quite strongly that I want to say, "it's OK with me if you're angry here"...
C23: (Pause) ... But I don't, you know ... it's hard to know how to be angry, you know ... hard to ...
T23: Sure, sure, I'm not saying you have to be. (C: Sure). I'm just saying it's OK with me. C24 Mmm.
T24: If you feel like being angry, you can be angry.
C25: Youreallybelievethat?
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 88

T25: Damn right.
C26: (12 second pause.) Well. (15 second pause.) (Sigh.) I'm not sure how to respond to that at all, you know, because a part of that anger is, you know, the ... the hurt, and maybe if I¡¯m... maybe what's happening is that if I'm ... if I become angry and I really let it hang out, that I really will see how hurt I am.
T26: Mmm, mmm.
C27: Andum,youknow,thatjustcametomeasyouweretalking.
T27: Mmm, mmm.
C28: That,youknow...
T28: Perhaps at a deeper level you're afraid of the hurt that you may experience if you let yourself experience the anger.
C29: Forsure. T29: Mmm. C30: Really. T30: Mmm.
C31: (Small laugh. Pause.) Um, whew ... (Pause.) I keep getting these blocks, you know ... these, you know ... when I come to something like that, you know, because, you know, to me that's a revelation and I'm not really sure that, uh, risking being angry I guess ... (T: Mmm.) or something like that, you know.
T31: Mmm.
C32: Losingcontrol,maybe.
T32: Yeah, mmm.
C33: You know? (Pause.) Well ... (takes a drink of water).
T33: I really do get that ... that this ... this realization that, "Maybe what I'm most afraid of is the hurt that I might experience", um, makes you more cautious about whether you should, whether you should or could really let go of the ... of the anger.
C34: Ireallydon'tknow,Ithinkthat...
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 89

T34: It's a risk.
C35: Right. And it's, you know ... I hadn't really thought about that before.
T35: Mmm. It's new.
C36: Yeah. It's, uh ... I guess I would be ... and I'd re-really would admit openly that I'm hurt. I, I said that I've been hurt.
T36: Mmm.
C37: And I think, you know, that I, I feel I've been hurt, but to really ... to show that, you know ...
T37: To show it and ... I guess to let yourself sort of ... experience it, that ... that, I guess would be difficult.
C38: Yeah, I, I don't know. It ... it's, it, it's as scary, I think, as the possibility of ... that I had before ... more than before, about dying, you know.
T38: Mmm. Mmm.
C39: And maybe, you know ... guess I was really scared because of the symptoms, you know, of, of, you know ... not being able to walk and not being able to see, and things like that, you know. And having to depend on somebody, you know. And for God's sake, you know ... having to show somebody that I'm ... that I'm hurt.(T: Mmm.) And how, you know, how can I trust that to somebody, (T: Mmm) you know. Umm ...
T39: Seems like a horribly big risk.
C40: Yeah, it is (small laugh). Seems to be getting bigger and bigger as we talk!
T40: Mmm, mmm, mmm. "Suppose I really expose to somebody the fact that I'm deeply, deeply hurt". That in a sense would be comparable to having to be dependent on someone when you can't walk or something like that.
C41: (Smiles and sighs.) Right. (Pause.) Yeah. I'd like to just to say it's my ... it¡¯s trying my conditioning. I try not to ... one way out of it ... and, uh (laughs) ... But that ... that isn't really acceptable to me now because I ... I, I, I, I feel that I ... I feel like ... that I have to express that, that hurt or whatever, but you know, I can say that, you know, and I know right down here, you know, I'm ... I'm saying that and when I say it, you know, it kind of keeps something down here. (Gestures, hand to chest, palm down. Laughs.), you know.
T41: Mmm. You're saying it from here up. (Gestures, hand at chest, palm down). Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 90

C42: For sure. For sure (small laugh). I don't know how to do that exactly ... whatever ... It's like I don't drink a lot, you know, because I don't really want to, uh ... (T: Mmm.) ... experience that kind of, uh, you know ... alcohol to me is a depressant anyway, and um, you know ... that's about the only thing I really like to get out ... to really get out, you know, and maybe saying, you know, like I'll love somebody. "I gave of myself". I did the ... hell ... the best I could, and it wasn't good enough, you know, and you know, demand on top of demand and everything like that, you know ... It's just, you know ... Shit ... you know, it's, it's like that I'd like to be able uhh ... and I said this here, the other day or when I was talking to you ... that I'd like to be able to, to say that ... yeah, "I was screwed over and I got hurt and everything else", like that, or whatever, but it's an ... it's almost an admission in a, in a way on another level of, of ... of saying that they got the best of me, you know.
T42: Mmm, mmm, mmm.
C43: AndIreallydon'want...
T43: Mmm.
C44: You know, I really don't want anybody historically to get, have ... to have gotten the best of me ... but they did. They did. They beat the hell out of me.
T44: You don't want to say, "I really was defeated at times", and yet that's the truth.
C45: Mmm. It is. (Sighs.) (Pause.) You know, being ... having it being all right to be defeated and be beaten and I don't know if there's any value in, you know ... maybe to myself ... admitting it to myself, or whatever, you know, but you know, I ... I'm really finding out I got a lot of (laughs), hangups in terms of, in that line that I hadn't thought of before, you know ... in terms of, you know, because I don't want to be beaten. (T: Mmm.) But I was, you know.
T45: Mmm.
C46: BecauseIthinkwhenyouarehurt,that'sbeingbeatenexcept,youknow... T46: Mmm, mmm.
C47: And I allowed myself to, and I don't regret caring, and I don't regret loving or whatever, but you know ... like I'm a ... I'm a kid, you know, I'm a kid in a way. I like to be loved too; I like to be uh ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) ... some reciprocity. And I'm going to start, I think, expecting that. You know ... without being cold or anything like that. (T: Mmm.) But I have to, you know, start getting something back in return.
T47: You want love to be mutual.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 91

C48: For sure, for sure. (T: Mmm,hmm.) And I don't want to have, uh get in the situation like I'm in now, you know, where I'm afraid to, to, to, show anybody that I am, I'm hurt, you know. (T: Mmm,mmm.) Scared to death ... terrified.
T48: Something really awful about showing ... letting anyone know that "I'm hurt". (C: Yeah.) "I'm hurting".
C49: Sure, sure. It's, you know ... it has something to do with being a man and it has something to do with ... with the race thing, you know.
T49: Mmm.
C50: Ithassomethingtodowiththerelationship...
T50: Mmm.
C51: Maybe the failure of a relationship, uh. A ... a lot of things, you know ... a father not being in the home with his children.
T51: Mmm.
C52: (Pause.) You know, I really feel like being a victim. T52: Mmm.
C53: (18 seconds pause. Smiles, takes a drink of water.) I don't know how to get that up at all. (Small laugh.) Every time I get close to that, I take a drink of water! (Laughs.) (T: Laughs.) Uh, I don't know if that acts to keep it down there or what.
T53: Maybe ... maybe, maybe that'll keep it from coming up above this level (gestures).
C54: For sure. I, I don't know. See, how it, it really isn't what I want either. You know, I want it to get out and stay out, you know.
T54: "I would like to let it out".
C55: Yeah. So maybe if you have any (sigh) exorcism type powers or whatever, (T: slight laugh.) that, uh ... maybe you can just do that and then I'll be free of that, you know. Because that's what it feels like ... it feels like there's something there, you know, that I really ... and I've identified it. I think I've identified it, you know, because I know there're some times when there¡¯s such a big lump in my throat, you know, and that I explain, I give myself a lot of reasons why I shouldn't be feeling like that, you know.
T55: A big lump of hurt, though. (C: Mmmm.) (15 second pause.) And how to let that hurt come out in the open ... how to let it ... emerge and be out here instead of way down
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 92

locked in here.
C56: Right. (Small laugh.) Yeah. You know, I, I, I never believe in cookbook answers to anything, even when I cook I don't use a cookbook. I just don't believe in it. I think, but I'd really like to be able for somebody to tell me (T: Mmm) to, you know, maybe how to do that in about five minutes (T: Mmm) and be through with it so I can live the rest of my life in peace. (T: laughs.) You know what I mean?
T56: (Laughs.) Sure. It'd be awfully nice if somebody could say, "Now, if you do this and this, all your hurt will come out and it will be gone forever".
C57: For sure.
T57: Be great, wouldn't it?
C58: For sure. (Laughs.) I have a suspicion that maybe you know some things that I don't know. (Laughs.)
T58: (Laughs.) No.
C59: Mmm.
T59: No, I'm not holding out on you.
C60: Hey, I, I believe that. I, I ... it feels like I'm holding out on myself ... (T: Mmm.) You know. But hell, you know. I don't know.
T60: I think it goes back to some of the things you mentioned. A man doesn't admit he's hurt ... a black man especially doesn't admit that he's been hurt by anything. (C: Sure.) Uh, a father doesn't admit he's been hurt by being away from his children. Just too many things that say: no, no, no ... don't let it out. (Pause.) But inside there's the hurt.
C61: Yeah.
T61: A phrase came to me a minute ago that, ¡°If you could let that out, ...¡± I don't know whether this will ring true to you or not ... ¡°If you could let that out, it would be the Voice of a Victim.¡± I don't know if that makes any sense or not.
C62: Mmm, yeah. And I don't know what, you know, I don't know if I have any control over that, (T: Mmm.) you know, of what, of what ... of what would happen, you know. It's like a friend of mine the other day, who helped me through my illness and everything, he says, you know, when I've encountered another person that, you know, a very intelligent sort that was talking a bunch of intellectual garbage about feelings and things like that ... that I really wa ... wanted to just, to, you know, I really saw the ... him ... the society, the culture, right in him, you know. (T: Mmm,
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 93

mmm.) And I really wanted to just ... to kind of deck him, you know, and that's something that's not uh my nature whatever, but I could just really wonder that ...
T62: Mmm, just like to have socked him.
C63: Yeah, yeah. And my friend said, you know, "one of these days", he says, if you ... "if you don't get it together" or, or something, he says ... not "that if you don't get it together", but he says, "one of these days you're gonna really lose it, you know". You know what I mean? It ... it's that I want to get rid of all that stuff that was done to me and not have to hear all that other stuff, (T: Mmm.) or to be able to deal with it in a very (T: Mmm) constructive kind of a way, you know. But still it grinds me because of all the other stuff that's happened to me. (T: Mmm.) And when I see other people doing it to other people, or whatever, it grinds me ... it makes me angry, you know? And I would think that in those situations, I've begun to kind of strike out, you know, or like you know, protecting somebody else or fighting for somebody else or whatever, and like I'm not sure what I did for myself, though, over those years that all that happened to me or whatever. (Pause.) Annnd, if I could cry and have it be all right...
T63: That's what I was thinking. (C: That would be ...) I was just thinking, if you could only cry.
C64: Yeah. It would, you know, but that's, that's a trip, you know ... that's a trip like uh...
T64: First place, a man doesn't cry.
C65: Yeah. For sure, for sure. That's a fact.
T65: But I guess you're saying that times you have that lump in your throat and you sure as hell feel like crying.
C66: For sure, for sure. (Pause.) Uhh, I don't know. (Sighs.) I don't know. Maybe going to a movie or one of those old, you know, (sighs) movies, dramas, or something like that ...
T66: Tear jerkers?
C67: Right ... so I can cry, you know, and have an excuse to cry, you know, but crying for myself, I'm not sure that, uh ... I'm just not sure that's going to be constructive, you know (laughs).
T67: Mmm, you say you're not sure whether crying for yourself is constructive. I feel also you're afraid of crying for yourself.
C68: I may be, I may be, because if I feel like crying and I don't, whenever there's some Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 94

things that are, you know ... but you see, that's a part of it too, you know? It's ... you know, and I, and I can't ... I, I hate to keep using these things of, you know, we're just being so conditioned not to, you know, from a little thing of, you know, like oh, you know, "be little, little men or big boys", or whatever. "Don't cry", and, and ...
T68: Probably your seven-year-old could cry.
C69: Yeah, for sure. I cried, I remember crying, but I cried alone. I never let anybody see me cry, you know? I wonder how many people have seen me cry! (Laughs.) (T: Laughs.) Two or three in the whole world. It's kind of interesting, you know. I remember living with my ex-wife, or whatever, she cried all the time. She cried get- ting up in the morning, and you know, just crying for crying, you know. I asked her sometimes about why she cried, and she just said, "I don't know, just wanted to, felt good". I don't know if that was healthy or whatever, but it probably is a lot more healthier than what I did.
T69: Mmm. It probably is better than never letting anyone see you cry.
C70: Right. There's just so many other ways to do it, you know, that I've learned, you know, like working hard. (T: Mmm.) Not thinking about it, (T: Mmm) you know. Not thinking about it.
T70: Just seeing that all the sorrow that you feel for yourself and for what's happened to you and all that, uh, "that doesn't really exist". It's just uh, you're too busy to have any thoughts of that.
C71: For sure.
T71: But the sorrow is still there.
C72: For sure. Yeah. And I really don't know how to de ... and I really don't know how to deal with that. I really don't. I really don't. (Sighs.) You know, just really giving so much of yourself and it's really crazy. Too much. (Sighs).
T72: If you did cry, what would some of the themes of that crying be?
C73: Well, just you know, all those, you know, hours that I, you know, that I spent away from my family and that I gave up my family and didn't see my children grow, you know. I really wanted that to be for some kind of a higher level, some kind of a cause, you know. But not to have that uh, to see anything, any benefit that I did. You know, all of that work, I mean, hours and hours and ... but it's just incredible, and I think that would be one, you know, I was saying, "Damn it, why in the hell did I spend so much time?" (T: Mmm.) "Why did I spend so much time?". You know, the leukemia, the ... everything that happened to me or whatever would be properly deserved if one person's life would have been changed, or something, you know. (T: Mmm.) And like, and maybe, maybe it has or whatever, but, but I think that I, I
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 95

don't trust that ... that it was worth it, you see?
T73 Mmm. Yeah. You invested a whole lot of caring, a whole lot of your self, and you feel real sorrow that maybe nothing came of that.
C74 Yeah, and I'd also like to uh just kind of cry for my father-in-law too, who was killed before I ... (T: Mmm,mmm, mmm, mmm.) about six months before I got the leukemia. (T: Mmm) I'd like to really tell him that I uh, that I really loved him a great deal.
T74: Mmm ... So you're telling me in place of telling him and maybe you could even speak to him, I don't know. But at any rate, you really would like to tell him, "I loved you, you know that? I loved you".
C75: Well, I, I really would, you know. Th-thisss situation that we started out ... I was married, and we married somebody of a different race, and we fought it out tooth and nail or whatever, and but, but yet we loved each other and we fished together and he was great with me. You know, he had a very ... to other people, a very cold way, you know, of, you know, "By God, this is the way it's going to be" and so forth. But I saw him when he was hurt too, and um when he was killed in, in 1975, in a, in a hunting accident, it just really took all of it, you know. (T: Mmm, mmm.) Because you see, he helped me to, to try to get out of that stuff. He's saying, "Hey, what are you doing, you know? Do ... what do you really want to do?". And at the time I wanted to, you know, to open my own restaurant or whatever. (T: Mmm.) And so he was going to help me finance that restaurant, you know. And so a week later he was killed. One week. And um, and so we were getting so close, but that I really never told him that, "Hey Dad, you know, hey Dad, I love you, I really love you". And we told each other, I guess, in some ways or whatever, but it's not the same as saying it, you know, as saying, "Dad, I really love you. I really care".
T75: You feel really sad that you never gave him a straight message on that, that "I love you".
C76: For sure, for sure, because he was straighter th ... with me than a lot of people, you know.
T76: Mmm.
C77: And to now to be taken away from all of that, you see, because it's only been, I don't know, eight months or so since I ceased all communication with my family, you know, family that ... my wife's family that I've loved and I've cared for and that I buried my father-in-law and that was it. That was the ... and then even the family began to take on those same things of the culture, you know.
T77: Things began to fall apart for you there, mmm, mmm.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 96

C78: For sure, for sure, you know. And lately, I don't know, falling apart or at least my being able to see that uh that it really wasn't, it wasn't true. (T: I see.) It wasn't real, I wasn't getting, I wasn't getting anything back, I wasn't getting any nourishment back, you know. (T: Mmm, mmm, mmm) Smiles and polite kisses and things like that, you know. That is, you know, part of the hurt, you know. I'd rather for somebody to say, you know, "I think you're a lousy S.O.B. or whatever", as opposed to saying, "Hello, dear, how are you?" You know, you know?.
T78: Mmm, mmm, mmm. When the real message perhaps is, "I think you're a lousy S.O.B.".
C79: Right, right, you know.
T79: Mmm.
C80: (25 second pause). Yeah, so there's, you know, there's a few things.
T80: Part of the sorrow would be for your father-in-law. You'd really weep for him.
C81: I ... yeah, I think I would, you know. And just maybe I still think that I really wish that I could, you know, just say, "Hey, you know, you guys, you really don't realize what you did to me", you know? Because for a while, I just, you know, saying, well, you know, "racist", "terrible", "blah, blah, blah". But that doesn't say anything, you know, because it doesn't say how I really feel, you know. (T: I see.) But they, but it, but it ... they wouldn't understand that, they wouldn't understand how a black person could be hurt, you know, because if you don't accept a person as human, how can you, how can you think about, you know, like ... it's like thinking a dog could be hurt of whatever, you know, people that don't have dogs and don't understand them, you know?
T81: But you get some satisfaction out of saying, "You people don't realize how much you hurt me". They might not be able to hear that message, but you'd get some satisfaction out of ... out of expressing that, out of ... out of letting, letting yourself know, letting others know that, "God, I've been hurt!"
C82: Yeah.
T82: "I've been wounded".
C83: I just don't think I could do that 'cause I just don't think that that that, I just don't trust, you know, you know, I wouldn't do it because I just wouldn't want to give them the satisfaction, you know. It's like I feel like, you know, my saying, you know, "Maybe that is my feeling". But I, I have too many times, you know, when you know, I opened up a little bit or whatever, and someone says ... (T: Mmm.) ... you know, squash!
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 97

T83: So there are probably loads of people you wouldn't dare open up to on that, but I guess you're opening up to me to say, "Yes, but I have been really wounded, badly, by a lot of people".
C84: For sure. Mmm. I maybe think that you can understand that a little bit in terms of about hurt and that, you know, that ... you know, that I, you know, that I'm a person and uh, (pause) you know, I'm a person. And I don't really want that denied to me ... (T: Mmm.) you know, ever again.
T84: Mmm, mmm.
C85: Youknow.Icouldreallygetangry. T85: Mmm. mmm.
C86: I don't you know, I just ... that's not going to happen to me, you know. In a way, you know, I don't want to love anybody like I did my father-in-law again, and for God's sake, you know, that's, that's painful, but I know that's terribly sick too, that you have to love, you have to continue to love people. Or whatever. But at that time, it was the only thing that was productive. It was the only thing that was something that was, you know, as Fromm talks about, biophilic. It was growth; it was nourishing. And that was the only thing, and that was just taken away from me, and it was taken away from me just ...
T86: Just like that.
C87: Youknow,Itwasjustreallystrange,youknow.
T87: So that, that's been a ... a hurt and a shock and makes you feel, "I can't risk myself loving somebody else like that because that might disappear some way or other".
C88: For sure, for sure. For sure. I certainly don't want any more in-laws. (Laughs). Be they uh whatever color. I'm not sure I want them, but now you know ... And that's ... I think that's part of it, you know. More so than, than the risking loving somebody, just because their death ... death I know is inevitable. But it's that, that other collection of things around it, or whatever. But you know, it's... it¡¯s crazy.
T88: It's what?
C89: It's crazy to love, you know, it's just like loving a pet rock or something, you know, it's nothing. Nothing, you don't feel.
T89: Mmm. mmm. "Love goes out from me but nothing comes back".
C90: Right. And I'm not so sure that that, that I want that, it to work like that again, you know. And maybe by ... maybe saying that, I don't know, maybe you know, calling,
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 98

say, "Hey, I really was hurt" and everything like that or whatever. Maybe that would be a start or whatever, but I just don't really trust that they really understand that. (T: Mmm) I don't really, really uh ... it took my wife who lived with me for seven years, you know, after I left, maybe six, seven months to understand that I was, that I was hurt, that I was ... that I was desperate.
T90: You feel there's so little chance of anyone else really understanding you.
C91: Mmm, that sounds kind of, yeah, well, (small laugh), so little chance for that group of people understanding me. (T: OK.) And I believe it. I really believe it, you know. It would just, it would be like me trying to, uh, to understand or to, to tell Dick Nixon or something about my feelings, that I just don't think he could relate to that,you know. (T: Mmm.) And I'm using, and ... and I'm really serious about that example, because he's so far away from me and my reality, and that family, you know, I found out was so far away from me and my reality that, you know, it was insane, you know. It was really insane, you know. So I think on one level I feel OK for loving them.
T91: You feel...?
C92: OKforlovingthem. T92: I see, mmm, mmm.
C93: But I don't feel OK for sharing any more with them. (T: Mmm.) And sharing that hurt is just, (T: Mmm) you know ... and maybe sharing it with other people would be OK. But I know I'm moving away from the other too, you know, that's really important to me right now. And I don't know ... maybe I won't ... I'm not rushing it, it just seems to want to get out and jump out or whatever, but, you know, you know. It's clearly must have really gone through ... my body really must have gone through some changes or whatever because, you know, something there is just keeping it, keeping it down, and I know all those reasons but I can't uh, I can't seem to muster that power to ... (T: Mmm.) ... to get it, to get that out, you know, to really, you know.
T93: It's still too much locked in.
C94: Yeah, for sure. But it really, it really helps, you know, um, 'cause it's, it's, it's just, you know ... it's incredible, you know, this is the first time I've talked to anybody that, you know, that I haven't really been in control. To some extent I've really given up a lot of control uh ... to you.
T94: Mmm, mmm, sort of letting things loose rather than ... (C: For sure.) ... keeping them under your control.
C95: Forsure.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 99

T95: And that's a new experience.
C96: A very new experience for me. Very new experience. And maybe I don't know if it's just not, just it's a function, function of that too, you know, or something, you know. Things are rattling around in my head now (laughs), you know. But all the other, it's just bullshit, and like I have been hurt and I really don't want to get involved anymore in terms of with people that can't return love and can't accept people. I just don't really want to get involved anymore. I'm sick and tired ... sick of it.
T96: Sounds as though you're more accepting of yourself as a person who is vulnerable, who has been hurt, who is hurting, and who wants love ... who doesn't want it all to be a one-way street of giving love. You want love back in return.
C97: Mmm, mmm. Yeah. And I wanna be able to uh, to feel and to, and to cry. (T: Mmm.) And not to be afraid of crying, and, and not to be afraid of, uh ... I want to be able and I'm going to work for that. I really wanna work for that. I, I know I do, you know, I just have this thing, ah, you know. If I trust the doctors, I'd have them cut 'em, cut me open and get that out, you know, but I don't. (Laughing.)
T97: (Laughs.) Mmm. Probably'd be simpler to have an operation.
C98: Oh yeah! (Sighs). Yeah, yeah, yeah. But I, but do you, do you, do you, do you, do you feel that ... you know, like I really wanna, you know, tell you how hurt I am, but I'm not, I can't tell you?
T98: I understand that. I ... you're, you're uh, it visualizes in my mind you're walking all around the edge of that pit, but you're not really letting yourself down into it; so you're letting me know all about it (clears throat), but, but not it.
C99: Yeah. For sure. Yeah. Don't know how to do that. (T: Mmm.) You know?
T99: Yeah. I, I hear you saying, "I really want to get to that, but it will have to be at my pace. I can't ... I can't force it. I can't... but I do want to get to it".
C100: Yeah. 'Cause I want to get to it really fast, you know, because that's all a part of me right now that's really ... I really feel that's sick, that's really the cancer, (T: Mmm) you know. That if I could eliminate that, I could eliminate all the cancer from my body. (T: Mmm.) I really believe it, you know. And I really blame, I really blame the way I lived and the stress and everything else like that on, on on the disease. I really do.
T100: You mean, you blame the disease on all that stress, is what you mean?
C101: Right, for sure, yeah. I have it turned around. For sure. I do. I do. And to some
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 100

extent, I blame racism. (T: Mmm, mmm.) You know, I just don't want to get caught up into that anymore, you know, and I want to continue to give, but I don't, I, I, I'm just not going to do it the way I did it before. And uh, I don't know. May ... yelling sometimes you know, like when I came in here, I was thinking about yelling, you know, one of those long, big long ... you know. But I'm not sure that I want to do that. (Smiles.)
T101: You could try it.
C102: (Laughs.) You know, I don't know, you know (Laughs.) That wouldn't be cultured.
T102: (Laughs.) Standards, standards, standards.
C103: Sure,Imean,I'mreally,Iwasreallysocialized.
T103: You were brought up right ... weren't you?
C104: Oh yeah, I was. I learned all of it ... all of it.
T104: And still in spite of yourself, buy a good deal of it.
C105: Yeah.Yeah.
T105: You really don't want to, but still you find ... (C: Yeah.) ... you can't do the uncultu- red thing.
C106: For sure. There were standards, I guess, and uh, that are really foreign to me, but uh, you know, the, the thing that, you know ... that I thought about you know, and like you know, I was like in terms of expressing my anger, whatever, comes out in terms of, you know (sighs), possible obscenity, you know (laughs), you know, like calling somebody a bunch of something or whatever would really, you know, I don't know what it would do, but you know, I'd really like to do that, you know.
T106: That helps to explain why I feel you've kept your language more, quite guarded here. I, I, I realize I've used more profanity than you have. (Laughs.)
C107: (Laughs.) For sure, you know. It's not because of, you know, but I don't know, it's just a, a part of that, you know, like I was just ...
T107: You'd like to just tell off the bastard!
C108: Yeah, right, right, right. For sure. (Laughs.) Oh my goodness! (Laughs.) T108: You can't even do that. (Laughs.)
C109: (Sighs.) Oh, it's incredible. I don't know. Whew! I'm getting warm.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 101

T109: C110:
(Laughs.) Both inside and outside
Yes, right, right. I'm getting extremely warm. Um, yeah, maybe I'll be able to do it one day, I guess. Maybe I'll be able to do it (laughs). I really haven't used ... but see, when I get out of here, I'll use a lot of profanity, you know. I don't, you know, just in terms of, you know, like I ... I, I, I, I think I did, you know, when I was really angry talking to my wife and things like that, you know, where I was just, "Goddammit", and all of that, you know, "bastards" and some other things and like, you know, I was raised properly, you know (laughs.). Uh, yeah, but I think part of that would be a part of expressing my (T: Mmm) feelings and everything like that, you know.
It wouldn't come out in nice, polite language.
No, it wouldn't. It, it really wouldn't. It really wouldn't. To my teachers that I had, to the family that I had, uh, to a lot of my colleagues, you know, and others. And ... but I don't know if I really want to tell them, you know, maybe it's just a part of just being proud and, and everything else like that, but at least to myself I, I need to get it out and openly.
Yeah. You may not tell it to them face to face, but you need to get it out of yourself somehow.
Mmm. Somehow, yeah, yeah. Really rotten and I really feel s ... you know, really screwed. I really feel ... (T: Mmm.) ... so badly.
"The bastards really screwed me".
Yeah, I know. They ... they got me, you know. It was just like uh, being part, I guess, that had something to do with being in, you know, I guess, you know, I just ... I just wipe 'em out, you know, if you don't get them with their bodies you do it in their mind, you know, like it happened, you know, and it was ... it was real, you know, and you know, to try to describe that hell to somebody is just the, the hardest thing, you know. But it's like, you know, just somebody knocking you down ... (T: Mmm.) ... and it's somebody coming and stomping on you and spitting on you and everything like that, and like it's just, you know, and just being at ... feeling like garbage.
Mmm, mmm.
And I have the feeling that people have made me feel like garbage, you know, and like ... you know? I'm sure that my friends would say, you know, God, I had everything. But I didn't have everything. I didn't have everything. Certainly didn't have that respect as a person.
 T110: C111:
T111: C112:
T112: C113:
T113: C114:
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 102

T114:
C115: T115: C116:
T116: C117:
T117: C118:
T118: C119:
T119: C120:
But there were a lot of people who, though they may or may not have beaten you physically, treated you in a way that just trampled on you and beat you up and spit on you and made you a nobody, a piece of garbage.
Right. And it won't happen again. Not if I can help it (small laugh).
Mmm.
It's 'cause I'm really tired of fighting. (T: Mmm.) Really tired of expending that kind of energy. (T: Mmm.) It really is just, is straining, it's too draining, and like, you know, I don't really know what's gonna happen in terms of, you know, how I'm going to do that, you know. Get it out or (sighs) or whatever, but you know, I just don't really want to say that I'm hurt or whatever, because that is ... that isn't even descriptive (small laugh) enough for what really happened.
Yeah. To say a word like that or several of the words you've used just isn't at all the same as feeling those feelings inside and really feeling them fully.
It really is, uh, I don't know if you saw "The Excorcist", but it really is, really is, you know, that oohf, you know, I remember a scene in that movie where the girl who threw up this green slime, you know, and that's really, it's that, you know, it's that bad, you know, it's, you know, it's that, it's that bad. 'Cause I know it ... I know it now, you know. It's not a part of me and my body really wants to reject that, but how to, how to throw that up is ...
Yeah, how to ... how to vomit up that green slime that's been a part of your experience.
Yeah. Maybe I'm just afraid I'll look horrible, you know, or, or that I'd look horrible, or whatever, expressing that kind of anger, that kind of uh, that kind of hurt or whatever.
You wouldn't look civilized; you wouldn't look cultured.
(Laughs.) I don't, I don't know, you know. (Sighs.) I don't really know. But right now, the ... more than getting that out, I think the, uh, the overriding thing is that I wanna keep at least that control, to control that, for fear of, you see, I don't really want to get sick again (T: Mmm, mmm.) You know, and like I think this, the slightest, you know, just by being weak, by submitting to that kind of pain, um, somehow bring back my uh ...
You wonder about that ... whether if you, if you let out all the ... all the hell that you've experienced inside, it might uh, it might bring back your illness.
And that doesn't sound logical, does it? (Laughs.) I know that. (T: Smiles.) Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 103

T120: C121:
T121:
C122:
T122: C123: T123: C124:
T124: C125:
T125: C126:
T126: C127: T127: C128:
O.K. (Laughs.)
Thank you, thank you very much. (Sighs.) Oh, God. What a ... mmm. (20 second pause). I don't know. God, you know, I feel so beaten. I ... when I feel beaten right now, and I'm not sure why, but that in a way the, that I got, uh ... I really got something to say and it just, you know, and I know I'd feel better. But maybe I w- ouldn't, you know, I really talk ... God, I realize how I'm talking in circles. I seem to be talking in circles. Does it sound like uh?
No, not quite. It's more spirals, I think. (C: Laughs.) Getting, as you say, getting very close, you feel, you feel beaten right now as though, if only something could come out, you wouldn't feel beaten.
(Pause) Yeah (sighs) Think that you know, just ... that turned, that almost turned me into something really inhuman.
Mmm.
Ireallyalmostletitturnmeintosomethingreallyinhuman.
It damn near made an animal out of you.
Damn near, damn near, yeah. So you see, if uh, I don't want that to happen anymore. At all. Not gonna do it to me again (laughs).
No. That's very clear.
No. I know that doesn't help the other problem, but at least I know that (laughs), and I really do know that, you know. (T: Mmm, mmm.) Because I don't think anybody has a right to do that to anybody. Nobody ... teacher, wife, husband, whatever. Uh uh, and it, and it really wasn't my fault either and uh, and like I'm not the blameless ... I mean, I'm not without any blame or whatever, but you know, you know ... just like somebody took a big goddamned tree and just rammed it up ... ooh, so, you know? (Sighs.) Hard to describe, you know, you know?
Took a great big stick and rammed it up your ass ... Is that what you're saying? (Laughs.) I, I didn't say that.
Is that what you meant?
That'swhatImeant.
OK. That's what I want to know, whether I was catching your meaning correctly. Yeah, for sure. You know, and you know that that probably would be painful.
 Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 104

T128: C129:
T129: C130:
T130: C131:
T131:
C132:
(Sighs.)
And it's that kind of pain that you've suffered.
Yeah. (Pause). You just can't let it ... I just, I just can't let it happen again. (Sighs. 18 second pause.) I um really, uh, I just really don't know how to tell you how badly I've been hurt, you know. I really don't.
Goes beyond words.
Yeah. But I know, you know, it's there, and maybe I should attend to it a little bit more. But, goddammit, you know, just ooh...
You're feeling some of that hurt now.
Yeah. I am. I was thinking a ... about a wino on a street that continues to drink, doesn't have a place to live. You know I've seen so many people go by, they're the kind of person, you know, disgusting, don't want to work or whatever. But you know, I really feel like there may be some reasons. (T: Mmm.) And I know one thing, I'm gonna allow that person to be desperate ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) Because I'm thinking that probably people like that do things out of desperation. And um, 'cause I know, you know? I never really had a drinking problem or anything like that, but it's the kind of sensitivity that I've gotten from all of that.
Mmm, mmm. It seems, it seems to me that you're uh feeling it ... you know what it's like to be in desperation and you know what it could drag you to, and so maybe that¡¯s what¡¯s happened to some of them. Something like that.
For sure. For sure. And I think that I ... I think my, my heart goes out to people like that, people who can't afford to to do this or whatever, and ... because see, I had a lot of money and you know, it all left. And uh, but in a way I'm happier now, you know. But I really don't know, not sure really where to go next, but I know that I don't really want that kind of life anymore. That I wanna give, I wanna help, and I wanna talk to people or whatever, and before I do that, you know, I wanna get my thing together, and a part of that is just maybe admitting, you know, and I guess maybe admitting that I'm hurt and showing and expressing my hurt or whatever will, will reaffirm the fact that I'm a person (T: Mmm, mmm.) Because apart from that, I think showing that is a, you know, pulling myself up too high, (T: Mmm.) you know, and that¡¯s what everybody, you know, that's the way everything was.
"I don't, I don't feel it ... I don't hurt, I'm, I'm fine"... That¡¯s a lot of bullshit. For sure. But at least I'm admitting to you that I'm hurt, you know.
Yeah, that's right, mmm. And just for a moment there, I felt you really were experiencing that too, really feeling that stick shoved up your ass.
T132: C133: T133:
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 105

C134:
T134: C135:
T135:
C136:
T136: C137: T137: C138:
T138: C139:
T139:
C140: T140: C141:
Oh, yeah, you know, when I, you know, what is, you know how your natural reaction, you know, when you start feeling stuff like that, or at least when I do, I just kind of, you know, I've got to put it all out of, out of my mind, bring it down to a different level. And I think that's what I'm doing, I keep doing, you know, when I get to the point. Gotta bring it to a safe level.
Yeah. That's right. You get that close, you get that close to the pit and then pull away a little.
(Pause.) For sure. You, you ... is it all right to have everybody else to blame? (Laughs.) (T: laughs.) You know, for your, for your problem, instead of sharing some of that. But I shared, you know, I, I, I think I've really, I shared that, you know.
I think ... I think what you're saying is, "I feel as though, dammit, everybody else is to blame. My mind says, Oh, no, you have, you probably have a part in it too, but..." (C: Sure. Sure.) ...your feelings are ...
Yeah, yeah. And I guess I hurt myself. I didn't, other people ... maybe if I can clarify that ... I let myself be hurt. (T: Mmm, mmm.) You know, because I just gave too much, you know.
Mmm. Made yourself vulnerable sometimes. Really. And not sometimes ... most of the times. Most of the times.
You know, by being, you know, just by being, by sharing, by being there, by giving, you know, and really loving. Because I do have that sense of a total, you know, that just, I wanna love, that's my nature.
Mmm, mmm.
But you know, I, I've really never been this beaten. I never ... you know, never have.
I want to be clear about your meaning. You've never felt so much of being beaten as you do right now? Is that what you're saying?
Well,throughthiswholething,youknow.
Yeah.
Just beaten, you know, just really beaten, and I think that if I show you how much
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 106

T141: C142:
T142: C143: T143: C144: T144: C145: T145: C146: T146
C147: T147:
C148: T148: C149: T149:
I've been beaten or whatever, you know, like I'd probably, you know, become nothing in this chair, you know, just ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) You know? (Laughs.)
You might practically disappear if you really let me know how hurt and beaten and awful you feel.
Mmm, for sure. For sure. You know, I could tell you some times I mean that would just, you know, maybe blow you away, you know. (T: Mmmm.) ... (Sighs and appears on the edge of crying during a 20 second pause.) Really too much for me.
Hmm?
It'sreallytoomuchforme.
Too much. Mmm.
Ifeellikeit.
I, I think you feel as though, "I've gone about as far as I can go at this point". Yeah. Mmm, yeah, really. (Laughs.) When I start smiling, I know I am. Mmm. Taking a drink of water.
For sure. (Laughs.) Well, you know, but I'm being truthful about it anyway.
Mmm, yeah. Yeah, I feel, I feel too. Uh, you've walked around that pit of hurt and pain and beaten-ness, and you've, you've felt some of it and uh, and perhaps that's as far as you can go right at this moment.
Yeah.
Even though you know there's more there, you know that you're keeping some of it down. Um and to know those things may be helpful too.
Yeah. You see, because I, I can talk about this leukemia and and all this stuff and everything like that and ... (T: Mmm, mmm.) well, I guess it's you know...
Fascinating. And it's easier to talk about leukemia and the possibility of death and all that, than it is to talk about all the hurt and awfulness that you've suffered.
Yeah. (Sighs.) Whew, oh, I really, whew, a lot, you know (sighs). I have to stop. OK?
OK. All right, mmm. Gone about as far as you can go.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 107

C150: Right.
T150: Mmm. OK, we'll call it quits.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, 2nd Interview, page 108

FINAL COMMENT BY ROGERS
[Source: Box 137/4, Carl Rogers Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC]
Here is an armor-plated man. He has been sufficiently hurt that he hides his real feelings very deeply. But in this relationship, the armor begins to crack - just begins to crack. He says, "This is the first time I've ever talked to anybody that I haven't really been in control". So in this understanding climate he lets himself creep closer to the experiencing of his feelings.
My image is that he is walking all around his own private slough of despond. We find the upper layer is anger, but further down in the slime are the unspeakable hurts, and the feelings of being tramped on, defeated and humiliated. He gets so close to experiencing some of this, that his expressions become eloquent nonverbal communication: "Ooooh!" "Whew! Whew, oh, whew! I've got to stop". I feel that at that moment he puts his foot into this dreaded pit, but then has to draw back. I don't regret this. I regard it as demonstrating the wisdom of the client. He knows where the worst spots are in his experiencing. He knows what he can tolerate. He has to proceed at his own pace.
Along the way we see how powerful metaphor is in the deeper ranges of psychotherapy. Metaphor is so much more expressive than an intellectual description... The lump in his throat... The ability to speak from "up here" and not from "down there"... The goddamn tree stuck up his ass... The green slime that must be vomited... They all speak vividly of his feelings, without naming those feelings.
From an intellectual and theoretical point of view there are bits that fascinate me.
His introjected self is his cultured self, the quotes "credit to his race". It has little relation to the real feelings in which he could discover his real self.
Another bit. He reports very convincingly that if he let his feelings all out, it would make him sick again. But hearing those exact words spoken acceptantly by me, makes him realize it's a ridiculous view. To me that's a fascinating interchange.
Here¡¯s another bit. When I give him full permission to be as angry as he wishes, that stops him completely. Then he can no longer avoid the fact that it is not his anger that he is afraid of, but the hurting and vulnerable part of him.
Then there is the mourning which accompanies unexpressed love, the love for his father-in-law which he was never able to communicate. I think he gained from communicating it to me.
Finally, he makes it very clear that for him there are many more frightening aspects of his life than the prospect of death. Somehow this seems to contain a message for all of us.
As for me, I felt very present in the relationship, an understanding companion on this trip of exploration which seemed so potentially dangerous to him. I think it is a good example of how I work with an articulate client.
Rogers¡¯ Transcripts, Volume 12, Dione, Post-Session Commentary, page 109

Case 9:
Therapist (T1): I'm always nervous. I seem to get nervous that the tape is something that I've got control of, you know, like it's going to be my tape, and I think I'm nervous about speaking into it because usually if it is someone else's, then I'm less conscious of it or something, you know.
Client (C1): Is this yours, or is it...
Therapist (T2): No, it's not mine. I mean, I'm not going to...it's going to be theirs. So hopefully, I'm not going to be as nervous as I would have been (brief laugh). We could put it where we couldn't see it.
Client (C2): I don't mind.
Therapist (T3): Yeah, OK. You don't mind.
Client (C3): Um, I kind of wanted to start with a part of the dream that I had last night. Um, it's been grating at me. Every once in a while, I have a dream that I feel was significant and that... that sticks with me, and I... and I know that I need to know what it meant. This one part of the dream had a lot of complexities. It really was odd, and what it was, was this car which belongs to a man that I have been dating. I was like looking for it in the dream. And I couldn't find it. And so I thought, well, he wasn't around. And then all of a sudden, I saw it. It was like in the brush, you know. It was definitely in sight. But it was as if it was parked so that it wouldn't be in sight. And, you know, I can see the tree limb hanging down, and I'm real intrigued by it. It definitely reminds me of... the fact that this car doesn't have headlights right now.
Therapist (T4): You mean like they are gone? There are holes in there?
Client (C4): No, in reality, it does, but there's something wrong with the headlights.
Therapist (T5): Oh, oh.
Client (C5): Something with the electrical system keeps them from working at night.
Therapist (T6): They just don't turn on when you push the button?
Client (C6): Yeah.
Therapist (T7): So when you push the button...
Client (C7): Yeah. Which means that he can't drive at night, so what he does is that sometimes he parks his car at the Seven-Eleven and leaves it there, and he wouldn't necessarily be there, you know. Let's say he came to visit me. He wouldn't necessarily be there. He left my place and went somewhere else. The Seven-Eleven is like where he leaves his car, and that way it can be watched because they stay open 24 hours.
Therapist (T8): Well, last evening after I left when we were all getting together, I drove by the Seven-Eleven to see if his car was there because I was interested to know if he was in town. He is from Cleveland. And I drove by, and the car wasn't there, and I remembered having a thought that maybe he was somewhere else. And... ah... or maybe he didn't even want me to know that he was in town. And I'm pretty sure that's what the dream has to do with¡ªmy concern that he doesn't want me to know that he's around. Really, I think it goes a little deeper than that. I should say that he doesn't want a relationship like I do.
Client (C8): Well, the thing was hiding... the car being hidden behind the tree symbolized him hiding it somewhere.
Therapist (T9): Yeah. That bothers you.
Client (C9): Yeah, that bothers me. I have different feelings about it.
Therapist (T10): That bothers you that he doesn't want... you feel he doesn't...
Client (C10): Well, yeah, the relationship... OK. I have to clarify that we have only known each other for two weeks, OK. And it's probably premature, but we spent a whole lot of time with each other in the past week and a half, and I was basically on cloud nine about the whole thing. And we were talking about going camping together, which just sounded like a great idea. And he seemed to really be enjoying me, and I was enjoying him, and I was kind of wondering, gee, when is the honeymoon going to end. But... feeling like I was ready to enjoy it as long as it lasted. And then he reported to me that he had talked to his mom and dad, and they had inquired as to whether he had spent the night at my place or not, and he told them that he had slept on the sofa, which indeed he did. But then he was feeling like he couldn't do that anymore. And I felt hurt a little bit at that. And I'm not sure... I'm not sure... I'm a little angry, where my anger is directed. I'm a little confused... as to whether it's at his parents or at him. I think both. Um, probably the thing that strikes me the most is that he would allow his parents to make decisions for him. I feel like... if he genuinely inside feels like it's wrong to spend the night, if he feels like he doesn't want to do that because he feels like it's not right, then I can really accept that. I can accept and respect it either way, but that doesn't get me angry. It makes me feel a little disappointed or, you know, "shucks, I want you to stay with me. I wish you didn't feel that way." But I feel angrier with him, I think, because it seems to be the situation where he doesn't deep down feel that way. It's more like he feels like he has to do this for his parents. And I don't know... I guess um... I was involved in a two-year relationship with a man who couldn't make a commitment to me because he was married to his mother. And I'm cautious about getting involved in a situation that's similar... I see... there's a difference... if he... if he really... I think some people can really feel that they want to do something for their parents because their parents request it, and on the other hand, "Gee, I got to do that because it's my parents' wishes." See, I don't operate like that. Not that I haven't in the past. But I don't and... I don't know.
Therapist (T11): I kinda missed that, you don't operate like that... you don't do things... You don't like to feel it's good to do things you really don't want to do just because they kind of think you should. Is that...?
Client (C11): Ah-ha.
Therapist (T12): I just kind of...
Client (C12): Um-um.
Therapist (T13): Missed the point. Yeah, OK.
Client (C13): You know, I guess I feel I need to clarify what I mean. Well, there are things like that my mom wants me to do, like write a thank-you letter to somebody if they send me something like a card or a gift or whatever. I want to write a thank-you letter because I feel like I want to write a thank-you letter. And my relationship with my mom has improved. Like, I used to get angry with her: "Mom, don't tell me to do that. I know to do that," you know. But now I deal with her a little differently. I say either, you know, "I've already sent it." But then see it kind of ribs me if I say that to her. If I say, "Well, I've already sent it." "Oh good, you're such a..."
Therapist (T14): Ah-ha.
Client (C14): "A good girl," or something. I feel like, oh gosh, you know (short laugh).
Therapist (T15): (short laugh)
Client (C15): That thing¡ªI want to do it because I want to do it, not because it's the right thing to do from God Almighty or mother or whomever. And... I guess that's my experience with Eddie. I want to feel like he's making this decision because he really feels like... I mean, I don't really care. I don't want to tell him how to behave. I want to feel... I want to love somebody who's making this decision on their own. And I don't feel like he's doing that, and that's making me angry.
Therapist (T16): Um-um.
Client (C16): I don't... yeah. And so I think that's probably my... This is an area where I'm not real sure of myself. Um. I question myself. Is it really okay... to want to discuss a potential future, you know? I'm not ambivalent on that.
Therapist (T17): Ah-ha.
Client (C17): My experiences with it probably should have taught me by now that oftentimes it doesn't work out real well to discuss the future. Because I... it hasn't been real successful.
Therapist (T18): Particularly in that type of thing. About that. About future relationships with a man and woman.
Client (C18): Yeah.
Therapist (T19): I think particularly it gets sticky here. Something strange happens. I mean, I don't mean it's not a good thing to do, but sometimes guys start to get real nervous when that happens (slight laugh). I...
Client (C19): Mm-mm.
Therapist (T20): It happens particularly in those things. Yeah... you are probably still going to be thinking about it anyway, the future, whether you say something about it or not?
Client (C20): Well, you know, like... it would be possible to not. I can see possibly having a different perspective on relationships. The perspective where you do enjoy them now, and if something happens more, then it will. I tend to think about whether I could or I couldn't live with this person the rest of my life. I tend to think about whether or not... you know... um... sometimes I'm unsure. I don't have that many suitors (slight laugh) that there are that many times anyway. So, I don't have much experience to go on. Um... my past relationships are characterized by basically two long-term relationships, one of which happened very quickly, and the other one I was involved in a relationship that was on its way to being a long-term relationship when I ended that one to get involved with this other man. So... (sigh)... I'm not sure. I think I had arrived at the decision that I was not going to bring up the issue of a long-term relationship with him, with Eddie. And then what happened, we met for a couple of d-cafes (laughs), I think that's going to be the new American expression. "I'll have a cup of d-cafe" (laughs). When we met for a cup of coffee, he told me that this conversation with his mom came up, and it set off an alarm inside of me. And I got anxious and concerned. And he's telling me that he's not going to be able to spend the night at all. It could have gone in many ways. And I guess what I'm seeing is that I could have said, "Well, OK," and continued to maintain the relationship as much as possible and not become concerned... I don't know what would have happened. But that's a thing with me. Before he said that, I felt more certain even without speaking.
Therapist (T21): Certain? What certain?
Client (C21): About how he felt about me.
Therapist (T22): Oh.
Client (C22): And, you know, and...
Therapist (T23): OK.
Client (C23): No, it was pretty clear to me that he really enjoyed me.
Therapist (T24): Yeah.
Client (C24): He wanted to spend time with me as much as we both could.
Therapist (T25): Right.
Client (C25): At this point, I became uncertain.
Therapist (T26): Doesn't seem like... it's kind of like his feelings for his mother are toward her... What do you think? Or did you begin to feel... that's how it struck me. That was more... this was more something about her than about... than about you.
Client (C26): Than about me. Yeah, I understood you. I've wondered about that... yeah. You know, probably, yeah, it was more something about her. And I guess the alarm that it set off in me was "Uh oh," because my last relationship, like I said, this man was married to his mother, and we went out for two years together and boiled down to he could not leave home. And I just refused to allow that to happen to me again. And, you know, this guy... here¡¯s a situation where maybe it¡¯s not me. Because the last one wasn¡¯t me. But boy, he couldn¡¯t leave mom. I mean, he couldn¡¯t do certain things against mom. And one of the big things between Eddie and I is I¡¯m Catholic, and he¡¯s not. And despite the fact that he really admires and likes Catholicism and in some ways thinks that Catholicism is his religion¡ªI met him at a Catholic club, a Catholic group¡ªdespite that, his mom has real reservations about that. And, um... he feels a strong pull to that, and so I wanted to clarify how he was feeling about me. I did take it as... as it was partly me. And... and see, this is the thing. It's so soon in the relationship that perhaps if we had gone out for a long time together, you know, he would have felt differently. But see, that's what I'm so afraid I'm allowing to happen, we¡¯ll go out for a long time, and in fact, he won¡¯t want to stay with me...
Therapist (T27): He won¡¯t... because of the mother thing again, you mean...
Client (C27): Yeah. Despite how much in love with me he becomes. And so I just feel the need to clarify that a lot. I mean, John really loves me to death. And I know that, but I, you know, have pain about that because it doesn't matter how much he loves me. He cannot be with me. He will not be with me. And, ah... and so, ah, you know, here's a situation where maybe I'm allowing myself to transfer off this relationship. I don't know. I am not going to let this past shit interfere. Because, you know, Eddie is not John. And I'm treating it similarly. And preventing that from happening, which, you know, I can understand but...
Therapist (T28): Well, so... mm-mm.
Client (C27): And so I just feel the need to clarify that a lot. I mean, John really loves me to death. And I know that, but I, you know, have pain about that because it doesn't matter how much he loves me. He cannot be with me. He will not be with me. And, ah... and so, ah, you know, here's a situation where maybe I'm allowing myself to transfer off this relationship. I don't know. I am not going to let this past stuff interfere. Because, you know, Eddie is not John. And I'm treating it similarly. And preventing that from happening, which, you know, I can understand but...
Therapist (T28): Well, so... mm-mm.
Client (C28): But I was going to say, if the guy didn¡¯t feel he could sleep at your house because his mother said that, I don¡¯t know what... that does sound somewhat... ah... along that line and I... I...
Therapist (T29): Mm-mm.
Client (C29): Yeah, I guess, you know. I'm not concerned with how common it is or isn¡¯t. I'm concerned about how I feel and how he feels. There's some men... I mean, I don't just ask men to sleep over. I haven¡¯t slept with a man in a long time. We didn¡¯t have sex. I mean, in a way, it was fairly ludicrous because (slight laugh), you know, what¡¯s the difference, if he comes over and we have, you know, we have sex, versus he comes and sleeps over and we don¡¯t have sex, you know. And so I kind of think it¡¯s a little ludicrous... Um... he agrees, but the other part of it is... and I... after I pursued it, he said to me that... one thing he said was he didn¡¯t want to lie. He didn¡¯t know whether to say this or not, but he guessed he would... that he had fantasized us married, you know. But he also said that from the outset that he didn¡¯t think it was going to work. The way he met me. And, you know, that of course didn¡¯t feel real good, but you know he said he saw problems. Which, you know, I see too. (pause)
Therapist (T30): Yeah.
Client (C30): But I wasn¡¯t so interested in exploring the problems at that point until this thing with his mom came up.
Therapist (T31): Yeah.
Client (C31): I was really into enjoying him very much.
Therapist (T32): Yeah.
Client (C32): And so I got this message from him, "I don¡¯t think I¡¯m going to be spending as much time with you." I feel like maybe I need to clarify that with him and... um... one of the things he said was that he didn¡¯t want to see me hurt. And I think part of what he was saying, well I¡¯m pretty sure that he was saying, "I want to have a relationship with you. I really enjoy you. I like you a lot." And I know he does. And I...
Therapist (T33): Yeah.
Client (C33): But I think that he might be looking at this more in terms of not enjoying me for now, but that I¡¯m going to fall in love with him and he¡¯s not going to be here for me. (Inaudible) And, yeah, if that¡¯s true, I don¡¯t want that. And then, but then I, you know, raised the whole issue with a girlfriend who makes a comment to me that, "Hey, you know, you enjoy the relationship then." And it makes a lot of sense to me (slight laugh). Because otherwise you could miss out on a lot of relationships if you are always looking, you know... (sigh) But golly. I really feel like crap. I don¡¯t want to waste my time when down the road, boom. I mean, you know. I¡¯ve been through... I¡¯m aware that the reality of the situation is he could tell me he loves and wants to marry me someday and then leave me, and for that matter I could do the same to him, you know. I¡¯m aware of that... it doesn¡¯t matter (slight laugh).
Therapist (T34): Mm-mm.
Client (C34): ... (long pause) A really fortunate part of my experience with him is that he¡¯s the first man that I really really really enjoyed since my last relationship. And I really felt like I could tell him that I loved him. (Softly crying) And I, you know, question whether I would ever feel like I wanted to ever say that to somebody again. (Softly crying) That¡¯s real nice. And ah... I don¡¯t feel like I need to contact John anymore. Which I had called to contact him every once in a while. (long pause). (Blows nose). It... it was really good to feel, you know, like there was somebody out there that I was in love with. (slight laugh). Ah... (slight laugh). (silence with soft crying)
Therapist (T35): Yeah.
Client (C35): I have really changed as a result of having that experience. I don¡¯t know what¡¯s going to happen with this in the future. It¡¯s part of me that I¡¯m going to have to look at. One of the things that happened was I stopped having that need to have it happen. Even now... and I¡¯m not sure because it¡¯s not totally over. And if I felt that I wasn¡¯t going to see him again or something, I would get back that feeling. I don¡¯t like walking around with the feeling of being available... and it¡¯s not so much a feeling of being available, it¡¯s more looking for available partners. I¡¯d rather go on about my business and have somebody (laughs). I don¡¯t really know how to be single real well. From the time I was sixteen to twenty, I had a relationship. Then I didn¡¯t for a while, but that was almost like my second latency, you know, where I had a real close girlfriend and didn¡¯t really care about men for a while. We did things like twelve-year-olds do. We looked around and all but never really thought we¡¯d get any of them, you know. But ah... then I had a relationship for a while with Tom, until then he left for Chicago, which was when I met John and started to date him. My Tetley tea man.
Therapist (T36): Your what?
Client (C36): My Tetley tea man. I don¡¯t know why he... (inaudible)
Therapist (T37): Ah.
Client (C37): I mean...
Therapist (T38): It sounds like a nickname.
Client (C38): He left me a note one time, you know, signed ¡°your Tetley tea man.¡± I...
Therapist (T39): Ah, okay.
Client (C39): (soft crying) But ah... so I really... and I have been saying it's been a year for I don't know how long (laughs). But it probably will be a year forever. No, it's been a year and a few months now. And that has really been over, and it was several months before that when it really wasn¡¯t working; it¡¯s been a year or so since I¡¯ve seen him. And so I have been single for a year and three months. Which is amazing (slight laugh). I don¡¯t really know how to be single and be comfortable. I haven¡¯t been single comfortably.
Client (C39): I had a great summer on the beach, but I was always interested in, you know, where's the man I'm going to meet. I knew that was unrealistic because I was at the beach and getting ready to move to L.A., but I still had this feeling like maybe I can meet somebody who¡¯s looking for a place to go (slight laugh). Maybe I'll meet somebody from L.A. I walked around with that more than I would have liked to. I had some good times. I had some real good times.
Therapist (T40): Yeah, it sounds like it was a nice time but also brought up some feelings of loneliness.
Client (C40): I feel like crying... it's almost like I equate aloneness with loneliness (pause). But I did have some good times walking up and down the beach. And I think that's one of the reasons I'm feeling teary. I kind of see a picture of me walking along the beach. And on the one hand, it¡¯s really good to be alive. Then on the other, it's really rotten because you're supposed to walk down the beach with your lover (laughs). You know? Like they do in the commercials. So... that was really strange because for the first year and three months of my adult life I didn¡¯t have a boyfriend. That was really strange because all kinds of people ask you, "Do you have a boyfriend?" Your nieces ask you, "Do you have a boyfriend?" (slight laugh) No, I don¡¯t. Gee, that¡¯s strange. But it¡¯s better than having John, not having one. If they ask, ¡°Do you have a boyfriend?¡± I¡¯d say, "Yeah, but my boyfriend is married to his mother" (laughs).
Therapist (T41): (laughs) That¡¯s what you¡¯d say to your nieces? (laughs)
Client (C41): (laughs) Really. Well, he needs help. He doesn't know how people... But anyway, it's alone, alone, alone. It's different. Well, I'm comfortable with myself in that I don't feel like I¡¯d just be with somebody to be with somebody. I need to feel that way. At one point, I worried about that, you know, that I might not do that. But I have had enough chances now that I tested that¡¯s not true. That¡¯s a crisis sometimes, loneliness, you know, which I have come to realize... it¡¯s better for me than involvement in behavior that I don¡¯t like... (silence) (sigh)
Therapist (T42): That sounds like an important realization.
Client (C42): One thing Eddie mentioned that I think is worth considering that hasn¡¯t... a lot of my time is spent working because I¡¯m in a doctoral program, and I do spend a lot of time working on school. And I¡¯m concerned about my future, not even just with Eddie, but with anybody. How I can incorporate a full-time job with a marriage and a family. I really have some serious worries about what I would do to my kids with so much of my time into my work. And I¡¯m concerned about that. And what made me think about that was that he mentioned that a lot. And I spent more time sitting down and talking with him than I have in a long time with anybody. I take off time here and there, but we spent days together where I do a lot of talking to him and to some extent neglect my work or save it for times when we weren¡¯t together and do less than I might have otherwise. I get less sleep than I might have otherwise. So... I really wonder... I¡¯ve got to draw some lines somewhere. I don¡¯t want to have kids who have a mother who¡¯s never there for them. (silence)
Therapist (T43): Uh-huh.
Client (C43): Because I feel like I have some control over my life, and I would like to plan it in the future so that I don't get caught in the trap of not being there for my children. (silence) Yeah. It really gets down to what¡¯s most important to me. 'Cause on one hand, I love to be the scholar, and I love to work, and it¡¯s really hard to give it up. But I love to go and play and go camping and that too. But it¡¯s real hard to compromise those two things.
Therapist (T44): It sounds like a real dilemma¡ªfinding that balance between career and family.
Client (C44): Yeah, I think about my childhood and my parents, and I feel cheated out of some of their time. And I know they worked real hard to make money so that they could give me things. Sometimes I just feel like it¡¯s not worth it. I mean, I feel like it¡¯s not worth it (slight laugh). But... I do. I do. But I feel like those extra couple of days¡¯ work, they, you know, didn¡¯t have to work. They could have taken the day off. It¡¯s too much. So now would be the time to start making a change. (silence)
Therapist (T45): Mm-hmm.
Client (C45): It's a real difference. It¡¯s a different kind of pressure, you know. I have to make a conscious kind of effort to put away the books and not feel guilty if I took an evening off. I don¡¯t feel that anymore, but... I surely would feel guilty if I took a whole day and night off. But really, why I don¡¯t feel that way is because I don¡¯t.
Therapist (T46): You don¡¯t...
Client (C46): I don¡¯t. I don¡¯t take that time off. I get my work done so I don¡¯t need to feel guilty.
Therapist (T47): Yeah.
Client (C47): And I am aware that I am going to get it done. But, you know, in the context of like a family and all, I might have this much amount of work. I¡¯m not concerned because I am going to get it done, but where¡¯s that going to leave me in terms of time with them? And, I mean, that¡¯s an issue I really haven¡¯t touched upon... I don¡¯t know if I¡¯m ready to deal with it. If I can make some changes before that time comes or if I have to deal with it before then. I don¡¯t know. Really where I¡¯m at right now is what I¡¯m going to do with Eddie. What I feel inside. What I feel about Eddie. I feel like I resolved a whole lot about that. Just the whole issue about whether he is doing this for his mom. And I don¡¯t like that. And ah... (silence) which is real pitiful because I lied to myself about that with John. For a long time... Is this going to work out? I don¡¯t know. You know, I confused accepting him as a person with accepting the situation with his mom. Out of it was my struggle to be able to accept people. So I really wanted to be able to accept him, and long term. However crazy he was. He¡¯s a neat guy, I mean, you know. And then it hits me that I really feel... I really felt good because I felt like... here¡¯s this guy, he¡¯s thirty-three years old, he¡¯s got his stuff together, you know. He¡¯s getting his master¡¯s degree. He¡¯s taught and what all else, and... I¡¯m really excited, and I do love him. I do love him. But... it¡¯s like, hey, I have a decision here too (slight laugh).
Therapist (T48): Yeah.
Client (C48): It¡¯s not just him deciding about me.
Therapist (T49): It sounds like you're realizing that it's not just about accepting him, but also about what you want and what you're willing to live with in the relationship.
Client (C49): Yes, exactly. It¡¯s not just about whether I can accept him and his situation, but also about what I need in a partner and what kind of relationship I want for myself. I don¡¯t want to feel like I¡¯m making excuses for him or his relationship with his mom. It needs to feel right for me too.
Therapist (T50): So, it's about balancing your own needs with the acceptance of his circumstances.
Client (C50): Yes, and I think that¡¯s been hard for me to see in past relationships. With John, I kept trying to convince myself that I could accept everything, even things that weren¡¯t really okay with me, just because I wanted to make it work so badly. But I don¡¯t want to do that anymore. I want to find someone where it feels mutual and right, without having to ignore big parts of myself.
Therapist (T51): That¡¯s a significant shift, realizing that it¡¯s okay to consider your own needs and that it doesn¡¯t mean you¡¯re rejecting the other person, but honoring yourself as well.
Client (C51): Yes, exactly. I think that¡¯s what I¡¯m trying to do here. But it¡¯s scary because there¡¯s a part of me that worries I won¡¯t find that balance with anyone, that maybe everyone has something I¡¯d have to compromise too much on. And yet, I don¡¯t want to settle again.
Therapist (T52): It sounds like you¡¯re acknowledging your own worth and your own needs, and that¡¯s a powerful place to be. It may feel uncertain, but it¡¯s also about trusting that there¡¯s someone out there who can meet you where you are.
Client (C52): Yes, I think so. I want to believe that. It feels good to say it out loud, even if there¡¯s part of me that still doubts.
Therapist (T53): I can hear that doubt, but it seems like you¡¯re also strengthening your conviction about what¡¯s important for you in a relationship.
Client (C53): Yes. I don¡¯t want to keep repeating old patterns. I want something real, with someone who respects me and doesn¡¯t expect me to compromise myself.
Therapist (T54): You¡¯re setting a new standard for yourself, one that¡¯s more aligned with what you truly value.
Client (C54): Yes, that¡¯s what I want to do. And I¡¯m realizing that I don¡¯t have to rush it, that it¡¯s okay to take my time. I¡¯ve always felt this pressure, like I need to be in a relationship, but maybe it¡¯s better to wait for the right one.
Therapist (T55): Giving yourself permission to take your time sounds freeing. It allows you to explore relationships without feeling that urgency to make them work at all costs.
Client (C55): Yes, I think that¡¯s the biggest thing for me now¡ªlearning to be okay on my own, and not feeling like I have to be in a relationship to feel complete.
Therapist (T56): That¡¯s a powerful realization. It¡¯s about knowing you¡¯re whole as you are, and that a relationship can add to your life, rather than defining it.
Client (C56): Yes, exactly. Thank you for helping me see that. I feel like I have a better sense of what I want and don¡¯t want.
Therapist (T57): I¡¯m glad to hear that. It sounds like you¡¯re making some meaningful progress toward finding what truly resonates with you.
Client (C57): Yes, it feels that way. I think I have a lot to think about, but it¡¯s a good place to start.

  

